    GOVERNANCE OF THE JURIST
         ( Velayat-e Faqeeh )




    ISLAMIC GOVERNMENT


                  IMĀM KHOMEINI




                       Publisher:
      The Institute for Compilation and Publication of
                  Imam Khomeini’s Works
              (International Affairs Division)



         Translator and Annotator: Hamid Algar
       Proofread and typeset by: Mansoor L. Limba
         Address: P.O. Box 19575 / 614, Tehran,
                 Islamic Republic of Iran




1                                                    Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
                           Table of Contents


FOREWORD                                                     3

ISLAMIC GOVERNMENT
1. Introduction                                              7

2. The Necessity for Islamic Government                     18

3. The Form of Islamic Government                           29

4. Program for the Establishment of an Islamic Government   78




2                                                           Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
                                         FOREWORD

                    In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

        All praise be to God; there is neither might nor strength but from God, the
Exalted, the Sublime. May peace and blessings be upon the Messenger of God,
Muhammad, the Seal of the Prophets, and his purified progeny.
        The present book, Governance of the Jurist, including relevant footnotes and
explanations, is the compendium of thirteen speeches of His Eminence Imām
Khomeini delivered during his stay in Najaf from January 21 to February 8, 1970.
Now, this book is presented to the knowledgeable researchers and those ardent of the
works of Imām Khomeini. These speeches had been reproduced and disseminated
then in various forms as lessons and instruction materials. Later, in autumn of 1970
the texts of the speeches were edited and prepared for printing. Following the
approval of Imām Khomeini, it was printed in Beirut (Lebanon) by Imām Khomeini’s
friends, then secretly sent to Iran, while copies of which were simultaneously sent to
the revolutionary Muslims in Europe, United States, Pakistan, and Afghanistan. In
1977, before the victory of the Islamic Revolution, the book was published in Iran
entitled, A Letter from Imām Mūsāwi Kāshif al-Ghitā and Jihād-i Akbar as its
supplement. Like the other works of Imām Khomeini, the book Governance of the
Jurist had been considered on top of the list of prohibited books for publication during
the Shāh’s regime. So many people were imprisoned and tortured on the charge of
publishing, possessing, or reading the book. However, despite all pressures exerted by
the SAVAK (the Shāh’s notorious secret police) and restraints imposed by the Shāh’s
regime, the notion to support the establishment of an Islamic government whose
legislative principles are expounded here by Imām Khomeini, gained a widespread
adherence among the revolutionary Muslim forces at the religious seminaries,
universities and other notable centers; and with the 15th of Khurdād uprising and
Imām Khomeini’s movement, the idea of establishing an Islamic government based
on governance of the jurist was crystallized as a fundamental idea. The Islamic jurists
(fuqahā) have generally been involved in the issue of governance of the jurist in
different subject matters in fiqh, some briefly and some in details. However, no
comprehensive and orderly discourse is found in the fiqh books of predecessors; the
reason being the unfavorable political and social conditions prevailing over Islamic
countries in the past and the dominance of tyrannical ruling cliques that had made it
impossible to touch upon such discussions. But regardless of the difference among
fuqahā on the extent of authorities and the case applicability of governance of the
jurist during the period of Occultation,* there is unanimity among them in general as
to the affirmation of a certain kind of guardianship authority for the fully competent
faqīh. Opinions of fuqahā on the kind of guardianship and the extent of authorities of
the Islamic jurists during the period of Occultation have been recently compiled and
published in some books.
        According to available sources, the late Āyatullāh Mullā Ahmad Narāqi** (one
of the Qājār dynasty contemporary scholars) has dealt with this subject matter in his
book ‘Awā’id al-Ayyām more detailed than the others. He first tried to seek evidence

*
    See n. 27 of the present volume.
**
     See n. 107 of the present volume.


3                                                                  Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
from numerous narrations proving that the faqīh is entrusted with guardianship rights
during the Occultation period in the following areas:
         1.      In all instances, where the Prophet and the infallible Imāms (‘a) had
         been authorized and assigned as guardians except in cases, where this had
         been excluded due to religiously legal requirement.
         2.      In all instances related to religious and living duties of people that must
         be carried out.
         By relying on Qur’anic verses, Prophetic traditions, and jurisprudential
arguments, he continues the discourse by giving ten examples of applicable cases
within the sphere of governance of the jurist such as iftā; administering punishment;
protecting the properties of the orphans, insane, and the absent individuals; and taking
possession of properties of the infallible Imāms.
         Although it can be understood from the late Narāqi’s discussions that he has
included governance within the same sphere, he has not openly stressed on it.
         After the late Narāqi, Imām Khomeini was the only faqīh to deal tacitly with
the governance of the jurist for the first time and proved the point. As indicated
earlier, Imām Khomeini had once discussed the question of governance of the jurist in
Najaf in thirteen instructional sessions of which the present book is the transcription
and edited form of the same course instructions. He further discussed governance of
the jurist in the second volume of his five-volume book entitled, Kitāb al-Bay‘ in the
same profound style.
         In the present book, Governance of the Jurist, Imām Khomeini has laid great
emphasis on guardianship (wilāyat) as a principle, serving as the base and foundation
for all duties. He especially examines guardianship from governmental and political
points of view. Here, in addition to expounding the political and social factors causing
the neglect of the most important Islamic issue, he has methodologically examined the
question, and based on the same sturdy approach exercised in fiqh, proceeded with
introductory practicable programs for realization of governance of the jurist in the
government.
         He begins by disclosing the plots and conspiracies made by the enemies to
annihilate Islam. Then he continues logically to discuss insinuated misgivings, such as
“Islam is not a competent religion to govern the society at the age of industrial
civilization” or “legal provisions of Islam are inadequate to resolve the social
problems, and to provide us with appropriate answers”.
         In this regard Imām Khomeini points out that the misgivings suggested by the
enemies to pave the way for the faulty notion of separation of religion from politics,
have unfortunately been so much effective; even in the seminaries, one dares not to
speak freely about the Islamic government. He further indicated the domestic
shortcomings and infatuations for the new civilization, all of which are the souvenir of
the devilish propaganda of imperialism. He warned the seminaries, the young clergy
students, and the Muslim thinkers to endeavor enormously to carry out their political
and social duties and be careful not to be deceived. Islam is not opposed to
technological and industrial progress; but social problems require ethical and religious
solution, and Islam is that all-embracing religion that can solve all problems, provided
the thinkers and scholars of the Islamic world would face the challenge.
         By expounding the indisputable historical fact that the Most Noble Messenger
(s) had appointed a successor, Imām Khomeini posed the question of “whether the
successor had been designed just to expound the religious precepts.” Of course not!
Expounding religious precepts does not require to be done by the Prophet’s successor.
Therefore the appointment had been for rulership, and for enforcement of laws and


4                                                                     Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
regulations. It is most important now to believe in the necessity to establish an Islamic
government; thus, we can determine the position and role of the successor.
        In this book Imām Khomeini has given some instances proving the necessity
for establishing an Islamic government, as follows:
   1. Action taken by the Holy Prophet (s) to establish a government;
   2. The fact that divine precepts are to be enforced perpetually; they are enacted
    not only for the time of the Holy Prophet (s); they are meant for all time.
   3. The nature and characteristic of Islamic laws and regulations like fiscal,
    national defense, and legal and penal precepts are such that they are not
    executable without a government.
        After giving quite well-reasoned explanation on the necessity of Islamic
government, Imām Khomeini refers to the historical background of deviation from
this principle during the Umayyad period and its continuation during the Abbasids
who had adopted un-Islamic rule, imitating the Iranian monarchical, Roman imperial
and the Egyptian pharaonic systems. And the same way continued afterwards. He
stresses on the logical demand for alteration of such systems, and that it is therefore
necessary to stir up a political revolution. Accordingly, it is necessary to revolt against
tyrannical governments to pave the way for the establishment of Islamic government
and the enforcement of Islamic precepts, unification of Islamic ummah that have now
fallen into the trap of disunity caused by various domestic elements as well as
foreigners, and finally, to save the oppressed and the deprived people as a religious
duty of all Muslims, especially the scholars. Imām Khomeini further continues
emphasizing on the necessity of establishing an Islamic government, by relating the
subject to a narration quoted by Fadl ibn Shādān on the philosophy of ordaining
governments as provided for in the narration and traditions.
        An important part of the book deals with the difference between an Islamic
government and other types of governments, pointing out that the Islamic government
is a special kind of constitutional government that is anchored on the Islamic laws.
Imām Khomeini believes, therefore, that Islamic legislative power or law-making
assemblies are bound to devise all governmental plans and programs within the
framework of Islamic precepts; not according to regular procedures followed by other
states.
        Imām Khomeini further deals with the prerequisite qualities of the ruler, as
derived directly from the nature of Islamic government. In addition to the regular
requirement such as intelligence and prudence, there are two principal prerequisites
for the ruler: his knowledge about the law and his justness.
        Governance of the faqīh during the Occultation is the next to be dealt with.
Following the previous discussion, Imām Khomeini says, “Now we live at the
Occultation period. On the one hand, Islamic precepts are to be enforced, (and no one
is designated by God Almighty to fulfill this task), and on the other hand, what should
we do then?” He examines this subject matter and comes to the conclusion that “God
Almighty has given the quality which is required for rulership to a great number of
religious scholars from the very outset of Islam to the advent of the Imām of the Age
(‘a). This quality is the knowledge about law and justice. A great number of our
contemporary scholars (fuqahā) possess this quality and they should join hands. They
will be able to establish a just government in the world.” He then points out that
governance of the jurist is an extrinsic and rational issue, and the fully competent
faqīh is entrusted with all the authorities; that the Prophet and the infallible Imāms
(‘a) were entitled too, for governance; and that this guardianship cannot be realized



5                                                                     Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
except through entitlement and that it implies in itself no dignity and status, but only a
means of carrying out one’s duty and enforcing religious precepts.
        The exalted aims of government, and characteristics required for the ruler are
then referred to. Relying on traditions, Imām Khomeini deduces that governance of
the jurist implies entitlement to government as well as argumentation that constitutes
the greater part of the book. The concluding part of the book deals with the necessity
for a long-range planning to achieve this divine objective. Here, Imām Khomeini
points out the importance of propagation and instructions, while saying, “Meetings
must be directed to serve these two important tasks. Struggles must be stirred as
‘Āshūrā to create waves of crowds insisting on the establishment of Islamic
government, and prepared for a long-term struggle while not bearing in mind an
immediate achievement”.
        The necessity for proper attention to instructions and propagations, moral and
cultural reformation of seminaries, annihilation of the moral and cultural effects of
imperialism, correction of the pseudo-saints, purging the seminaries of the court
‘ulamā, and finally, taking effective measures to overthrow the oppressive and
tyrannical governments, are among the concluding discussions of the book.
        Esteemed readers’ attentions are drawn to the fact that after his divine
uprising, which, thanks to the divine grace, consciousness and unity of the Muslim
people, gained victory over monarchical system in Iran on Bahman 22, 1358
Sh./February 11, 1979, Imām Khomeini undertook the leadership of the Islamic
Revolution and the guardianship function of the nation. It should, therefore, be taken
into consideration that comprehending precisely Imām Khomeini’s viewpoints on
governance of the jurist, which is explained in this book, can only be realized when
full consideration is given to his personal manners and conducts in the course of his
rule and his ideas about the extent of authorities and the station of guardianship as
expressed through his speeches, messages and letters.*
        “O God, foreshorten the arms of the oppressors that are stretched out against
the lands of the Muslims and root out all traitors to Islam and the Islamic countries.
Awaken the heads of the Muslims states from their deep sleep so that they may exert
themselves on behalf of their people’s interests and renounce divisiveness and the
quest for personal gain. Grant that the younger generation studying in the religious
colleges and the universities may struggle to reach the sacred aims of Islam and strive
together, with ranks united, first, to deliver the Islamic countries from the clutches of
imperialism and its vile agents, and then to defend them. Grant that the fuqahā and the
scholars may strive to guide and enlighten the minds of the people, to convey the
sacred aims of Islam to all Muslims, particularly the younger generation, and to
struggle for the establishment of an Islamic government. From You is success, and
there is neither recourse nor strength except in God, the Exalted, the Sublime.”*


                                                    The Institute for Compilation and Publication
                                                                      of Imām Khomeini’s Works




*
    A collection of the viewpoints and stances on this argumentation is being compiled by this Institute.
*
    The written supplication at the end of the present volume.


6                                                                                  Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
                                INTRODUCTION

                     In the name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful
                       All Praise be to God, the Lord of the worlds
                   And may His blessings be upon the best of His creation,
                            Muhammad and His Descendants.


 THE SUBJECT OF THE GOVERNANCE OF THE JURIST (vilāyat-i faqīh160)
provides us with the opportunity to discuss certain related matters and questions. The
governance of the faqīh is a subject that in itself elicits immediate assent and has little
need of demonstration, for anyone who has some general awareness of the beliefs and
ordinances of Islam will unhesitatingly give his assent to the principle of the
governance of the faqīh as soon as he encounters it; he will recognize it as necessary
and self-evident. If little attention is paid to this principle today, so that it has come to
require demonstration, it is because of the social circumstances prevailing among the
Muslims in general, and the teaching institution in particular. These circumstances, in
turn, have certain historical roots to which I will now briefly refer.
From the very beginning, the historical movement of Islam has had to contend with
the Jews, for it was they who first established anti-Islamic propaganda and engaged in
various stratagems, and as you can see, this activity continues down to the present.
Later they were joined by other groups, who were in certain respects, more satanic
than they. These new groups began their imperialist penetration of the Muslim
countries about three hundred years ago,1a and they regarded it as necessary to work
for the extirpation of Islam in order to attain their ultimate goals. It was not their aim
to alienate the people from Islam in order to promote Christianity among them, for the
imperialists really have no religious belief, Christian or Islamic. Rather, throughout
this long historical period, and going back to the Crusades,1b they felt that the major
obstacle in the path of their materialistic ambitions and the chief threat to their
political power was nothing but Islam and its ordinances, and the belief of the people
in Islam. They therefore plotted and campaigned against Islam by various means.
The preachers they planted in the religious teaching institution, the agents they
employed in the universities, government educational institutions, and publishing
houses, and the orientalists who work in the service of the imperialistic states—all
these people have pooled their energies in an effort to distort the principles of Islam.


160
    Faqīh: one learned in the principles and ordinances of Islamic law, or more generally, in all aspects
of the faith. For a full discussion of the term, see p. 69-70.
1a
   Since mid-16th century, i.e., more than three centuries ago when the Portuguese and thereafter the
Dutch, English, French, Italian, and the Spaniards colonized uslim countries. At the beginning, newly
discovered African countries and then, after finding the sea routes, Asian countries (whose link with
the Europeans had been curtailed since the Ottoman conquest of Constantinople in 1453) fell under the
sway of colonialism. [Pub.]
1b
   Crusades is the name of a series of war campaigns waged by the European Christians against the
Muslims (11th-13th centuries) for the control of the Holy Land, particularly Jerusalem. Waged in eight
stages, these campaigns commenced with the religious edict of Pope Urban II at the Council of
Clermont (1096/489) and ended with the death of the French King, Saint Louis IX (1214-70) in
1270/669. Owing to the red-colored piece of cloth in the form of cross embedded on their right
shoulders, the Christians became known as the Army of the Cross, or Crusaders. [Pub.]


7                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
As a result, many persons, particularly the educated, have formed misguided and
incorrect notions of Islam.
Islam is the religion of militant individuals who are committed to truth and justice. It
is the religion of those who desire freedom and independence. It is the school of those
who struggle against imperialism. But the servants of imperialism have presented
Islam in a totally different light. They have created in men’s minds a false notion of
Islam. The defective version of Islam, which they have presented in the religious
teaching institution, is intended to deprive Islam of its vital, revolutionary aspect and
to prevent Muslims from arousing themselves in order to gain their freedom, fulfill
the ordinances of Islam, and create a government that will assure their happiness and
allow them to live, lives worthy of human beings.
For example, the servants of imperialism declared that Islam is not a comprehensive
religion providing for every aspect of human life and has no laws or ordinances
pertaining to society. It has no particular form of government. Islam concerns itself
only with rules of ritual purity after menstruation and parturition. It may have a few
ethical principles, but it certainly has nothing to say about human life in general and
the ordering of society.
This kind of evil propaganda has unfortunately had an effect. Quite apart from the
masses, the educated class—university students and also many students at the
religious teaching institutions—have failed to understand Islam correctly and have
erroneous notions. Just as people may, in general, be unacquainted with a stranger, so
too they are unacquainted with Islam. Islam lives among the people of this world as if
it were a stranger.161 If somebody were to present Islam as it truly is, he would find it
difficult to make people believe him. In fact, the agents of imperialism in the religious
teaching institutions would raise a hue and cry against him.
In order to demonstrate to some extent, the difference between Islam and what is
presented as Islam, I would like to draw your attention to the difference between the
Holy Qur’an and the books of hadīth,162 on the one hand, and the practical treatises of
jurisprudence, on the other. The Holy Qur’an and the books of hadīth, which
represent the sources for the commands and ordinances of Islam, are completely
different from the treatises written by the mujtahīds163 of the present age both in
breadth of scope and in the effects they are capable of exerting on the life of society.
The ratio of Qur’anic verses concerned with the affairs of society to those concerned
with ritual worship is greater than a hundred to one. Of the approximately fifty
sections4a of the corpus of hadīth containing all the ordinances of Islam, not more than
three or four sections relate to matters of ritual worship and the duties of man toward
his Creator and Sustainer. A few more are concerned with questions of ethics, and all
the rest are concerned with social, economic, legal, and political questions—in short,
the gestation of society.

161
     This is an allusion to the celebrated saying of the Prophet: “Islam will again become a stranger
among men, as it was in the beginning, but blessed is the state of the stranger.”
162
     Hadīth: a tradition setting forth a saying or deed of the Prophet, or in Shī‘i usage, of one of the
Twelve Imāms.
163
     Mujtahīd: an authority on divine law who practices ijtihād, that is, “the search for a correct
opinion…in the deducing of the specific provisions of the law from its principles and ordinances”
(Muhammad Sanglaji, Qazā dar Islam [Tehran, 1338 Sh./1959], p.14).
4a
    The term kitāb (“book”) in the parlance of the Islamic jurists and traditionists means “section” in
which Prophetic narrations (ahādīth) pertaining to a single topic are collected or particular laws of a
topic, are discussed, such as Kitāb at-Tawhīd, Kitāb al-Īmān wa ’l-Fikr, Kitāb as-Salāh, and others. For
instance, in the hadīth literature, Dūreh-ye Kāfi consists of 35 books, and in jurisprudence, Sharā’i ‘ul-
Islām comprises 50 books. [Pub.]


8                                                                                Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
You who represent the younger generation and who, God willing, will be of service to
Islam in the future must strive diligently all your lives to pursue the aims I will now
set forth and to impart the laws and ordinances of Islam. In whatever way you deem
most beneficial, in writing or in speech, instruct the people about the problems Islam
has had to contend with since its inception and about the enemies and afflictions that
now threaten it. Do not allow the true nature of Islam to remain hidden, or people will
imagine that Islam is like Christianity (nominal, not true Christianity), a collection of
injunctions pertaining to man’s relation to God, and the mosques will be equated with
the church.
At a time when the West was a realm of darkness and obscurity—with its inhabitants
living in a state of barbarism, and America still peopled by half-savaged redskins—
and the two vast empires of Iran and Byzantium were under the rule of tyranny, class
privilege, and discrimination, and the powerful dominated all without any trace of law
or popular government, God, Exalted and Almighty, by means of the Most Noble
Messenger (s), sent laws that astound people with their magnitude. He instituted laws
and practices for all human affairs and laid injunctions for man extending from even
before the embryo is formed until after he is placed in the tomb. In just the same way
that there are laws setting forth the duties of worship for man, so too there are laws,
practices, and norms for the affairs of society and government. Islamic law is a
progressive, evolving, and comprehensive system. All the voluminous books that have
been compiled from the earliest times on different areas of law, such as judicial
procedure, social transactions, penal law,4b retribution,4c international relations,
regulations pertaining to peace and war, private and public law—taken together, these
contain a mere sample of the laws and injunctions of Islam. There is not a single topic
in human life for which Islam has not provided instructions and established a norm.
In order to make the Muslims, especially the intellectuals, and the younger generation,
deviate from the path of Islam, foreign agents have constantly insinuated that Islam
has nothing to offer, that Islam consists of a few ordinances concerning menstruation
and parturition, and that this is the proper field of study for the ākhūnds.164
There is something of truth here, for it is fitting that those ākhūnds who have no
intention of expounding the theories, injunctions and worldview of Islam and who
spend most of their time on precisely such matters, forgetting all the other topics of
Islamic law, be attacked and accused in this manner. They too are at fault; foreigners
are not the only ones to be blamed. For several centuries, as might be expected, the
foreigners laid certain plans to realize their political and economic ambitions, and the
neglect that has overtaken the religious teaching institution has made it possible for
them to succeed. There have been individuals among us, the ‘ulamā,165 who have
unwittingly contributed to the fulfillment of those aims, with the result that you now
see.


4b
   Hadd (literally means limit, boundary or limit) in the Islamic law is generally applied for penal law
for punishments prescribed for particular crimes. The extent of these punishments is determined by
law. [Pub.]
4c
   Qisās (literally means retribution or retaliation) in the Islamic jurisprudence is to be executed against
a criminal, according to the legal decree, who committed such crime as murder, amputation of a body
limb, or laceration and beating in case the victim or his guardians are seeking retribution in lieu of
receiving fine or blood money. [Pub.]
164
    Ākhūnd: a word of uncertain etymology that originally denoted a scholar of unusual attainment, but
was later applied to lesser-ranking scholars, and then acquired a pejorative connotation, particularly in
secularist usage.
165
    ‘Ulamā: the scholars of Islam.


9                                                                                  Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
It is sometimes insinuated that the injunctions of Islam are defective, and said that the
laws of judicial procedure, for example, are not all that they should be. In keeping
with this insinuation and propaganda, agents of Britain were instructed by their
masters to take advantage of the idea of constitutionalism in order to deceive the
people and conceal the true nature of their political crimes (the pertinent proofs and
documents are now available). At the beginning of the constitutional movement, when
people wanted to write laws and draw up a constitution, a copy of the Belgian legal
code was borrowed from the Belgian embassy and a handful of individuals (whose
names I do not wish to mention here) used it as the basis for the constitution they then
wrote, supplementing its deficiencies with borrowings from the French and British
legal codes.166 True, they added some of the ordinances of Islam in order to deceive
the people, but the basis of the laws that were now thrust upon the people was alien
and borrowed.
What connections do all the various articles of the Constitution as well as the body of
Supplementary Law167 concerning the monarchy, the succession, and so forth, have
with Islam? They are all opposed to Islam; they violate the system of government and
the laws of Islam.
Islam proclaims monarchy and hereditary succession wrong and invalid. When Islam
first appeared in Iran, the Byzantine Empire, Egypt, and the Yemen, the entire
institution of monarchy was abolished. In the blessed letters that the Most Noble
Messenger (s) wrote to the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius and the Shāhanshāh of
Iran,168 he called upon them to abandon the monarchical and imperial form of
166
    The draft of the first constitution was written by a commission from among the members of the
Parliament and was approved with 51 articles. Kasravi, in this connection, writes: “It seems that Mashīr
ad-Dawlah and Mu’tamīn al-Mulk and sons of Sadr A‘zam wrote it, or to be more appropriate, we say
they translated [it].” Thereafter, a committee was formed so that a text called “Supplement” be
appended in the constitution. By the way, this text was prepared in 107 articles. According to the
narration of Mustafā Rahīmi, “With the use of the Belgian constitution and to some extent, the French
constitution, and taking into account the laws of the Balkan states (in view of the newness of the
supplementary laws under consideration), the committee embarked on the compilation of the
Supplementary Constitutional Laws and on the omission of flaws of the former laws.” Concerning this
influence of Belgian constitutional law on the six-man committee that drafted the Supplementary
Constitutional Laws of 1907, see A.K.S. Lambton, “Dustur, iv: Iran,” Encyclopedia of Islam new ed.,
II, 653-654; Kasravi Tabrizi, Tārīkh-i Mashrūteh-yi Īrān (Constitutional History of Iran), pp. 170, 224;
Mustafā Rahīmi, Qānūn-i Asāsi-yi Īrān va Usūl-i Demokrāsi (The Constitution of Iran and Democratic
Principles) (Tehran, 1347 Sh./1968), p. 94; Qānūn-i Asāsi va Mutammin Ān (The Constituion and Its
Supplement) (Tehran: National Consultative Assembly Press). [Pub.]
167
    Articles 35 through 57 of the Supplementary Constitutional Laws approved on October 7, 1906
relate to “the rights of the throne.” See E.G. Browne, The Persian Revolution of 1905-1909
(Cambridge, 1911), pp. 337-379.
168
    In the seventh year of the Islamic era, Prophet Muhammad wrote not only to Heraclius and the ruler
of Iran (probably Parvīz), but also to the rulers of Egypt and Abyssinia, inviting them all to embrace
Islam and abandon unjust rule. Following is the text of the Most Noble Messenger’s letter to Khosroe
Parviz:
  “In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. From Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, to
the great Kisra of Iran. Peace be upon him, who seeks truth and expresses belief in Allah and in His
Prophet and testifies that there is no god but Allah and that He has no partner, and who believes that
Muhammad is His servant and Prophet. Under the Command of Allah, I invite you to Him. He has sent
me for the guidance of all people so that I may warn them all of His wrath and may present the
unbelievers with an ultimatum. Embrace Islam so that you may remain safe. And if you refuse to
accept Islam, you will be responsible for the sins of the Magi.”
  Text of his letter to Heraclius is as follows:
  “In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. “(This is a letter) from Muhammad ibn
‘Abdullāh to the great Hercules of Rome. Peace be upon the followers of guidance. I invite you to the
religion of Islam. Embrace Islam so that you may be safe. Allah will give you two rewards (reward for


10                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
government, to cease compelling the servants of God to worship them with absolute
obedience, and to permit men to worship God, Who has no partner and is the True
Monarch. Monarchy and hereditary succession represent the same sinister, evil system
of government that prompted the Doyen of the Martyrs169 (‘a) to rise up in revolt and
seek martyrdom in an effort to prevent its establishment. He revolted in repudiation of
the hereditary succession of Yazīd,170 to refuse it his recognition.
Islam, then, does not recognize monarchy and hereditary succession; they have no
place in Islam. If that is what is meant by the so-called deficiency of Islam, then Islam
is indeed deficient. Islam has laid down no laws for the practice of usury, for banking
on the basis of usury, for the consumption of alcohol, or for the cultivation of sexual
vice, having radically prohibited all of these. The ruling cliques, therefore, who are
the puppets of imperialism and wish to promote these vices in the Islamic world, will
naturally regard Islam as defective. They must import the appropriate laws from
Britain, France, Belgium, and most recently, America. The fact that Islam makes no
provision for the orderly pursuit of these illicit activities, far from being a deficiency,
is a sign of perfection and a source of pride.
The conspiracy worked out by the imperialist government of Britain at the beginning
of the constitutional movement had two purposes. The first, which was already known
at that time, was to eliminate the influence of Tsarist Russia in Iran, and the second
was to take the laws of Islam out of force and operation by introducing Western
laws.171
The imposition of foreign laws on our Islamic society has been the source of
numerous problems and difficulties. Knowledgeable people working in our judicial
system have many complaints concerning the existing laws and their mode of
operation. If a person becomes caught up in the judicial system of Iran or that of
analogous countries, he may have to spend a whole lifetime trying to prove his case.
In my youth I once encountered a learned lawyer who said, “I can spend my whole
life following a litigation back and forth through the judicial machinery, and then


your own faith as well as reward for the faith of those who are your subordinates). In case, however,
you turn away your face from Islam you will be responsible for the sins of the Arisiyans as well. “O
people of the Scriptures! We invite you to a common basis i.e., we should not worship anyone except
Allah. We should not treat anyone to be His partner. Some of us too should not accept others as their
gods. And (O Muhammad! as and when) they become recalcitrant against the true religion say: “Be
witness to the fact that we are Muslims [Q 3:64].” ”
  See Makātib ar-Rasūl, vol. 1, pp. 90 and 105; Ja‘far Subhāni, The Message (Karachi: Islamic
Seminary Publications, 1984), chap. 42, pp. 540-566, Muhammad Hamidullah, Le Prophète de l’Islam
(Paris, 1959), I, 196-197, 212, 230, 241. [Pub.]
169
    The Doyen of the Martyrs: Imām Husayn, grandson of the Prophet. Concerning his biography, see
Mīr Ahmad ‘Ali, Husain the Saviour of Islam (Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 1987); ‘Abdullāh Yūsuf
‘Ali, Imām Husain and His Martyrdom [Pub.]
170
    In 60/680, Imām Husayn refused to swear allegiance to Yazīd, son of Mu‘āwiyah and second caliph
of the Umayyad dynasty, since Yazīd did not possess legitimate authority and had succeeded to the
caliphate by hereditary succession. The ensuing death of the Imām in battle at Karbala has always been
commemorated by Shī‘ah Muslims as the supreme example of martyrdom in the face of tyranny. It
served as an important point of both ideological and emotive reference throughout the Islamic
Revolution in Iran. See Shaykh Muhammad Mahdi Shams ad-Dīn, The Revolution of Al-Husayn,
Ibrāhīm Āyāti, A Probe into the History of Āshūrā (Karachi: Islamic Seminary Publications, 1984);
Zākir, Tears and Tributes (Qum: Ansariyan Publications); Yāsīn T. al-Jibouri, Kerbala and Beyond
(Qum: Ansariyan Publications); Sayyid Wāhid Akhtar, “Karbala: An Enduring Paradigm of Islamic
Revivalism,” Al-Tawhīd Journal [Pub.]
171
     No detailed study has yet been made of the British role in the early part of the constitutional
movement. Some of the relevant documents, however, are to be found in General Report on Persia for
the Year 1906 (file F.O. 416/30, Public Records Office, London).


11                                                                            Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
bequeath it to my son for him to do the same thing!” That is the situation that now
prevails, except, of course, when one of the parties has influence, in which case the
matter is examined and settled swiftly, albeit unjustly.
Our present judicial laws have brought our people nothing but trouble, causing them
to neglect their daily task and providing the occasion for all kinds of misuse. Very few
people are able to obtain their legitimate rights. In the adjudication of cases, it is
necessary not only that everyone should obtain his rights, but also that correct
procedure be followed. People’s time must be considered, as well as the way of life
and profession of both parties, so that matters are resolved as swiftly and simply as
possible.
A case that a sharī‘ah172 judge in earlier times settled in one or two days cannot be
settled now in twenty years. The needy, young, and old alike, must spend the entire
day at the Ministry of Justice, from morning to evening, wasting their time in
corridors or standing in front of some official’s desk, and in the end they will still not
know what has transpired. Anyone who is more cunning, and more willing and able to
give bribes, has his case settled expeditiously, but at the cost of justice. Otherwise,
they must wait in frustration and perplexity until their entire lives are gone.
The agents of imperialism sometimes write in their books and their newspapers that
the legal provisions of Islam are too harsh. One person was even so impudent as to
write that the laws of Islam are harsh because they have originated with the Arabs, so
that the “harshness” of the Arabs is reflected in the harshness of Islamic law!
I am amazed at the way these people think. They kill people for possessing ten grams
of heroin and say, “That is the law” (I have been informed that ten people were put to
death some time ago, and another person more recently, for possession of ten grams
of heroin).173 Inhuman laws like this are concocted in the name of a campaign against
corruption, and they are not to be regarded as harsh. (I am not saying it is permissible
to sell heroin, but this is not the appropriate punishment. The sale of heroin must
indeed be prohibited but the punishment must be in proportion to the crime.)14a When
Islam, however, stipulates that the drinker of alcohol should receive eighty lashes,
they consider it “too harsh.” They can execute someone for possessing ten grams of
heroin and the question of harshness does not even arise!
Many forms of corruption that have appeared in society derive from alcohol. The
collisions that take place on our roads, and the murders and suicides are very often
caused by the consumption of alcohol. Indeed, even the use of heroin is said to derive
from addiction to alcohol. But still, some say, it is quiet unobjectionable for someone
to drink alcohol (after all, they do it in the West); so let alcohol be bought and sold
freely.
But when Islam wishes to prevent the consumption of alcohol—one of the major
evils—stipulating that the drinker should receive eighty lashes, or sexual vice,
decreeing that the fornicator be given one hundred lashes (and the married man or


172
     Sharī‘ah: the all-embracing law of Islam derived from the Qur’an, the normative practice and
authoritative pronouncements of the Prophet, and a number of secondary sources.
173
    A law promulgated in July 1969 provided the death penalty for anyone in possession of more than
two kilograms of opium or ten grams of heroin, morphine, or cocaine. The first ten executions were
carried out in December 1969 and by 1974, 236 people had been executed on charges under this law.
See Ulrich Gehrke, Iran: Natur, Bevolkerung, Geschichte, Kultur, Staat, Wirschaft (Tubingen and
Basel, 1976), p. 281. It is also probable that the law was also used to provide a cover for the execution
of political prisoners who had no involvement with narcotics. Concerning the royal family’s own
involvement in the drug trade, see p. 117, n. 167.
14a
    Imām Khomeini’s complain is referring to another point; that is, the absence of justice. [Pub.]


12                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
woman be stoned14b), then they start wailing and lamenting: “What a harsh law that is,
reflecting the harshness of the Arabs!” They are not aware that these penal provisions
of Islam are intended to keep great nations from being destroyed by corruption.
Sexual vice has now reached such proportions that it is destroying entire generations,
corrupting our youth, and causing them to neglect all forms of work. They are all
rushing to enjoy the various forms of vice that have become so freely available and so
enthusiastically promoted. Why should it be regarded as harsh if Islam stipulates that
an offender must be publicly flogged14c in order to protect the younger generation
from corruption?
At the same time, we see the masters of this ruling class of ours enacting slaughters in
Vietnam over fifteen years,14d devoting enormous budgets to this business of
bloodshed, and no one has the right to object! But if Islam commands its followers to
engage in warfare or defense in order to make men submit to laws that are beneficial
for them, and kill a few corrupt people or instigators of corruption, then they ask:
“What’s the purpose for that war?”
All of the foregoing represent plans drawn up several centuries ago that are now being
implemented and bearing fruit.
First, they opened a school in a certain place174 and we overlooked the matter and said
nothing. Our colleagues also were negligent in the matter and failed to prevent it from
being established so that now, as you can observe, these schools have multiplied, and
their missionaries have gone out into the provinces and villages, turning our children
into Christians or unbelievers.
14b
    Under the penal laws of Islam, proof of the married status is one of the indispensable requisites for
stoning an adulterer. Married man or woman is one who is mature (bāligh), mentally sound, and has a
permanent spouse. [Pub.]
14c
    In Islamic law, the presence of a number of believers at the time of penal execution has been
considered part of etiquettes of punishing the offender. Shī‘ah jurists have been emphasizing on the
observance of this tradition at the time of penal execution for adultery, slandering, and pandering. Their
religious edict regarding the first case is based on Sūrah an-Nūr (24:2): “And a number of believers
must witness the punishment of adulterer men and women.” Another reason for it is that the attendants
would take lesson from the requital, and anyone who is inclined to do so or is guilty of the same, would
desist or cease from its performance. [Pub.]
14d
    After many years of resistance against the French and Japanese colonizers, in 1960 Vietnam had
once again engaged in a protracted war with the United States. This war that ended in 1973 with the
defeat and withdrawal of the American forces, brought untold destructions and casualties on the
Vietnamese people. As the official figures fall short of exactly describing the degree of casualties and
damages wrought by this ruthless aggression, the realities of the bitter contemporary history can be
gleaned to some extent: Up to early 1965 when the scope of the war extended to South Vietnam, the
number of South Vietnamese who perished or were injured is as follows: 170,000 died, 800,00
wounded, and 400,000 imprisoned. During that time the number of persons who had been sent on
concentration camps, which are called “agricultural units” exceeds 5 millions. According to the Voice
of America (January 6, 1963), throughout 1962 US Air Force had attacked 50 thousand times villages
beyond the realm of “state villages,” and based on the assertions of General Herkins(?), on the same
year about 30 thousand villages perished. US Air Force operations in South Vietnam reached 30
thousand times a month. According to a news report of the New York Times, in a combined US and
Saigon government air operations nearly 1,400 out of 2,600 villages in the South were totally ruined by
napalm bombs and chemical weapons. A Red Cross report indicates that as the effect of using
poisonous elements in the vast and populous areas, thousands of residents in the South have been
afflicted with divergent diseases particularly skin-related ones and for a long time they have
experienced sufferings and discomforts arising from the sickness. Moreover, many herds of cows and
buffalos as well as other four-footed domesticated animals had died while leaves, flowers, and fruits of
tree and rice fields were completely devastated. [Pub.]
174
    We have not been able to determine whether this is an allusion to a particular school established by
foreigners. Before the Islamic Revolution, there were a number of foreign-run schools in Iran—secular
and missionary—that in effect alienated their students from Islamic culture and society.


13                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
Their plan is to keep us backward, to keep us in our present miserable state so they
can exploit our riches, our underground wealth, our lands, and our human resources.
They want us to remain afflicted and wretched, and our poor to be trapped in their
misery. Instead of surrendering to the injunctions of Islam, which provide a solution
for the problem of poverty, they and their agents wish to go on living in huge places
and enjoy lives of abominable luxury.
These plans of theirs are so broad in scope that they have even touched the institutions
of religious learning. If someone wishes to speak about an Islamic government and
the establishment of Islamic government, he must observe the principle of taqiyyah175
and count upon the opposition of those who have sold themselves to imperialism.
When this book was first printed, the agents of the embassy undertook certain
desperate measures to prevent its dissemination,176 which succeeded only in
disgracing themselves more than before.
Matters have now come to the point where some people consider the apparel of a
soldier incompatible with true manliness and justice, even though the leaders of our
religion were all soldiers, commanders, and warriors. They put on military dress and
went into battle in the wars that are described for us in our history; they killed and
they were killed. The Commander of the Faithful177 (‘a) himself would place a helmet
on his blessed head, don his coat of chain mail, and gird on a sword. Imām Hasan178
and the Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a), acted likewise. The later Imāms did not have the
opportunity to go into battle, even though Imām Bāqir179 (‘a) was also a warrior by
nature. But now the wearing of military apparel is thought to detract from a man’s
quality of justice,180 and it is said that one should not wear military dress. If we want
to form an Islamic government, then we must do it in our cloaks and turbans;
otherwise, we commit an offense against decency and justice!
This is all the result of the wave of propaganda that has now reached the religious
institution and imposed on us the duty of proving that Islam also possesses rules of
government.

175
    Taqiyyah: prudential dissimulation of one’s true beliefs under conditions of acute danger, a practice
based on Qur’an, 3:28. For a fuller discussion of taqiyyah, see ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’i, Shi‘ite Islam
(Albany, N.Y., 1975), pp. 223-225, Al-Taqiyya/Dissimulation, and also p. 133 of the present work.
[Pub.]
176
    This is a reference to an earlier and briefer series of talks given by Imām Khomeini on the subject of
Islamic government. The Iranian embassy in Baghdad had sought to prevent the published text of those
talks from being distributed.
177
    The Commander of the Faithful: ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib, cousin and son-in-law of the Prophet, and first
of the Twelve Imāms from the Prophet’s Progeny. He exercised rule from 35/656 until his martyrdom
in 40/661. See Yousuf N. Lalljee, ‘Ali the Magnificent (Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 1987);
Muhammad Jawād Chirri, The Brother of the Prophet Mohammad (Imām ‘Ali), (Qum: Ansariyan
Publications); George Jordaq, The Voice of Human Justice, trans. M. Fazal Haq (Qum: Ansariyan
Publications, 1990) [Pub.]
178
    Imām Hasan: son of Imām ‘Ali and second of the Imāms. He was poisoned in 50/670 after spending
most of his life in seclusion in Medina. See Shaykh Rādi Āl-Yāsīn, Sulh al-Hasan: The Peace Treaty of
Al-Hasan, trans. Jāsim al-Rasheed (Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 1998),
179
    Imām Bāqir: the fifth Imām. He was born in 57/675 and spent most of his life in Medina, until his
martydom there in 114/732. See Bāqir Sharīf al-Qarashi, The Life of Imām Mohammed al-Bāqir, trans.
Jāsim al-Rasheed (Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 1999). [Pub.]
180
    The “quality of justice” that is demanded of a religious scholar includes not only the practice of
equity in all social dealings, but also complete abstention from major sins, the consistent performance
of all devotional duties, and the avoidance of conduct incompatible with decorum. Justice is among the
requisites for becoming a judge, rector (mufti), and congregational prayer leader (imām). At the margin
of the book, Sharh-i Lum‘ah, vol. 1, chap. 11, p. 98, wearing of indecent clothes in the congregational
prayers has been considered contrary to the spirit of magnanimity (muruwwah) and justice. [Pub.]


14                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
That is our situation then—created for us by the foreigners through their propaganda
and their agents. They have removed from operation all the judicial processes and
political laws of Islam and replaced them with European importations, thus
diminishing the scope of Islam and ousting it from Islamic society. For the sake of
exploitation they have installed their agents in power.
So far, we have sketched the subversive and corrupting plan of imperialism. We must
now take into consideration as well certain internal factors notably the dazzling effect
that the material progress of the imperialist countries has had on some members of our
society. As the imperialist countries attained a high degree of wealth and affluence—
the result both of scientific and technical progress and of their plunder of the nations
of Asia and Africa—these individuals lost all their self-confidence and imagined that
the only way to achieve technical progress was to abandon their own laws and beliefs.
When the moon landings took place, for instance, they concluded that Muslims should
jettison their laws! But what is the connection between going to the moon and the
laws of Islam? Do they not see that countries having opposing laws and social
systems compete with each other in technical and scientific progress and the conquest
of space? Let them go all the way to Mars or beyond the Milky Way; they will still be
deprived of true happiness, moral virtues and spiritual advancement and be unable to
solve their own social problems. For the solution of social problems and the relief of
human misery require foundations in faith and moral; merely acquiring material
power and wealth, conquering nature and space, have no effect in this regard. They
must be supplemented by, and balanced with, the faith, the conviction, and the
morality of Islam in order truly to serve humanity instead of endangering it. This
conviction, this morality, and these laws that are needed, we already possess. So, as
soon as someone goes somewhere or invents something, we should not hurry to
abandon our religion and its laws, which regulate the life of man and provide for his
well being in this world and hereafter.
The same applies to the propaganda of the imperialists. Unfortunately some members
of our society have been influenced by their hostile propaganda, although they should
not have been. The imperialists have propagated among us the view that Islam does
not have a specific form of government or governmental institutions. They say further
that even if Islam does have certain laws, it has no method for enforcing them, so that
its function is purely legislative. This kind of propaganda forms part of the overall
plan of the imperialists to prevent the Muslims from becoming involved in political
activity and establishing an Islamic government. It is in total contradiction with our
fundamental beliefs.
We believe in government and believe that the Prophet (s) was bound to appoint a
successor, as he indeed did.21a Was a successor designated purely for the sake of
expounding law? The expounding of law did not require a successor to the Prophet.
He himself, after all, had expounded the laws; it would have been enough for the laws
to be written down in a book and put into people’s hands to guide them in their
actions. It was logically necessary for a successor to be appointed for the sake of
exercising government. Law requires a person to execute it. The same holds true in all

21a
   The Most Noble Messanger (s) indicated in many instances the successorship of Imām ‘Ali ibn Abi
Tālib (‘a) such as in Hadīth Yawm ad-Dār (Day of the Prophet’s invitation to his kinsmen); Hadīth
Manzilah (The Prophet’s designation of ‘Ali as his deputy in Medina during the Tabuk expedition);
Āyat al-Wilāyah (‘Ali’s offering of a ring to a beggar and the subsequent revelation of a pertinent
verse); Event of Ghadīr Khumm; and Hadīth ath-Thaqalayn. See Tafsir Kabīr, vol. 12, pp. 28, 53 under
Sūrah al-Mā’idah, verses 55, 67; Sīrah ibn Hisham, vol. 4, p. 520; Tārīkh Tabari, vol. 2, pp. 319, 322;
Al-Ghadīr, vols. 1-3; Caliphate of Imām ‘Ali,


15                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
countries of the world, for the establishment of a law is of little benefit in itself and
cannot secure the happiness of man. After a law is established, it is necessary also to
create an executive power. If a system of law or government lacks an executive
power, it is clearly deficient. Thus Islam, just as it established laws, also brought into
being an executive power.
There was still a further question: who was to hold the executive power? If the
Prophet (s) had not appointed a successor to assume the executive power, he would
have failed to complete his mission, as the Qur’an testifies.181 The necessity for the
implementation of divine law, the need for an executive power, and the importance of
that power in fulfilling the goals of the prophetic mission and establishing a just order
that would result in the happiness of mankind—all of this made the appointment of a
successor synonymous with the completion of the prophetic mission. In the time of
the Prophet (s), laws were not merely expounded and promulgated; they were also
implemented. The Messenger of God (s) was an executor of the law. For example, he
implemented the penal provisions of Islam: he cut off the hand of the thief and
administered lashings and stonings. The successor to the Prophet (s) must do the
same; his task is not legislation, but the implementation of the divine laws that the
Prophet (s) has promulgated. It is for this reason that the formation of a government
and the establishment of executive organs are necessary. Belief in the necessity for
these is part of the general belief in the Imamate, as are, too, exertion and struggle for
the sake of establishing them.
Pay close attention. Whereas hostility toward you has led them to misrepresent Islam,
it is necessary for you to present Islam and the doctrine of the Imamate correctly. You
must tell people: “We believe in the Imamate; we believe that the Prophet (s),
appointed a successor to assume responsibility for the affairs of the Muslims, and that
he did so in conformity with the divine will. Therefore, we must also believe in the
necessity for the establishment of government, and we must strive to establish organs
for the execution of law and the administration of affairs.” Write and publish books
concerning the laws of Islam and their beneficial effects on society. Improve your
style and method of preaching and related activity. Know that it is your duty to
establish an Islamic government. Have confidence in yourselves and know that you
are capable of fulfilling this task. The imperialists began laying their plans three or
four centuries ago; they started out with nothing, but see where they are now! We too
will begin with nothing, and we will pay no attention to the uproar created by a few
“xenomaniacs”182 and devoted servants of imperialism.
Present Islam to the people in its true form, so that our youth do not picture the
ākhūnds as sitting in some corner in Najaf or Qum, studying the questions of
menstruation and parturition instead of concerning themselves with politics, and draw
the conclusion that religion must be separate from politics. This slogan of the
separation of religion from politics and the demand that Islamic scholars should not

181
    “O Messenger! Proclaim what has been revealed to you by your Lord, for if you do not, you will not
have fulfilled the mission He has entrusted to you” (4:67). On the commentary of this verse, see Mīr
Ahmad ‘Ali, Text, Translation and Commentary of the Holy Qur’an (Ehlmurst, NY: Tahrike Tarsile
Qur’an, Inc., 1988),
182
    Xenomaniacs: those infatuated with foreign and especially Western models of culture. This is a
translation of a Persian term, gharbzādeh-ha, popularized by Jalāl Āl-i Ahmad (d. 1969) in his book
Gharbzādegi (“Xenomania”). See its English translation, R. Campbell (trans.) and Hamid Algar (ed.
and anno.), Occidentosis: A Plague from the West (Berkeley: Al-Mizan Press, 1984). He was a writer
of great influence and Imām Khomeini was acquainted with his work. See the commemorative
supplement on Jalāl Āl-i Ahmad in the Tehran daily newspaper Jumhūri-yi Islāmi, Shahrīvar 20,
1359/October 12, 1980, p. 10. [Pub.]


16                                                                            Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
intervene in social and political affairs have been formulated and propagated by the
imperialists; it is only the irreligious who repeat them. Were religion and politics
separate in the time of the Prophet (s)? Did there exist, on one side, a group of clerics,
and opposite it, a group of politicians and leaders? Were religion and politics separate
in the time of the caliphs—even if they were not legitimate—or in the time of the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a)? Did two separate authorities exist? These slogans
and claims have been advanced by the imperialists and their political agents in order
to prevent religion from ordering the affairs of this world and shaping Muslim society,
and at the same time to create a rift between the scholars of Islam, on the one hand,
and the masses and those struggling for freedom and independence, on the other. They
will thus been able to gain dominance over our people and plunder our resources, for
such has always been their ultimate goal.
If we Muslims do nothing but engage in the canonical prayer, petition God, and
invoke His name, the imperialists and the oppressive governments allied with them
will leave us alone. If we were to say “Let us concentrate on calling the azān183 and
saying our prayers. Let them come and rob us of everything we own—God will take
care of them! There is no power or recourse except in Him, and God willing, we will
be rewarded in the hereafter!”—if this were our logic, they would not disturb us.
Once during the occupation of Iraq, a certain British officer asked, “ Is the azān I hear
being called now on the minaret harmful to British policy?” When he was told that it
was harmless, he said: “Then let him call for prayers as much as he wants!”
If you pay no attention to the policies of the imperialists, and consider Islam to be
simply the few topics you are always studying and never go beyond them, then the
imperialists will leave you alone. Pray as much as you like; it is your oil they are
after—why should they worry about your prayers? They are after our minerals, and
want to turn our country into a market for their goods. That is the reason the puppet
governments they have installed prevent us from industrializing, and instead, establish
only assembly plants and industry that is dependent on the outside world.
They do not want us to be true human beings, for they are afraid of true human
beings. Even if only one true human being appears, they fear him, because others will
follow him and he will have an impact that can destroy the whole foundation of
tyranny, imperialism, and government by puppets. So, whenever some true human
being has appeared they have either killed or imprisoned and exiled him, and tried to
defame him by saying: “This is a political ākhūnd!” Now the Prophet (s) was also a
political person. This evil propaganda is undertaken by the political agents of
imperialism only to make you shun politics, to prevent you from intervening in the
affairs of society and struggling against treacherous governments and their anti-
national and anti-Islamic politics. They want to work their will as they please, with no
one to bar their way.




183
      Azān: the call to prayer.


17                                                                   Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
                       THE NECESSITY FOR
                     ISLAMIC GOVERNMENT

A BODY OF LAWS ALONE is not sufficient for a society to be reformed. In order
for law to ensure the reform and happiness of man, there must be an executive power
and an executor. For this reason, God Almighty, in addition to revealing a body of law
(i.e., the ordinances of the sharī‘ah), has laid down a particular form of government
together with executive and administrative institution.
The Most Noble Messenger (s) headed the executive and administrative institutions of
Muslim society. In addition to conveying the revelation and expounding and
interpreting the articles of faith and the ordinances and institutions of Islam, he
undertook the implementation of law and the establishment of the ordinances of
Islam, thereby, bringing into being the Islamic state. He did not content himself with
the promulgation of law; rather, he implemented it at the same time, cutting off hands
and administering lashings, and stonings. After the Most Noble Messenger (s), his
successor had the same duty and function. When the Prophet (s) appointed a
successor, it was not only for the purpose of expounding articles of faith and law; it
was for the implementation of law and the execution of God’s ordinances. It was this
function—the execution of law and the establishment of Islamic institutions—that
made the appointment of a successor such an important matter that the Prophet (s)
would have failed to fulfill his mission if he had neglected it. For after the Prophet (s),
the Muslims still needed someone to execute laws and establish the institution of
Islam in society, so that they might attain happiness in this world and the hereafter.
By their nature, in fact, laws and social institutions require the existence of an
executor. It has always and everywhere been the case that legislation alone has little
benefit: legislation by itself cannot assure the well-being of man. After the
establishment of legislation, an executive power must come into being, a power that
implements the laws and the verdicts given by the courts, thus allowing people to
benefit from the laws and the just sentences the courts deliver. Islam has therefore
established an executive power in the same way that it has brought laws into being.
The person who holds this executive power is known as the valī-yi amr.184
The Sunnah185 and path of the Prophet (s) constitute a proof of the necessity for
establishing government. First, he himself established a government, as history
testifies. He engaged in the implementation of laws, the establishment of the
ordinances of Islam, and the administration of society. He sent out governors to
different regions; both sat in judgment himself and also appointed judges; dispatched
emissaries to foreign states, tribal chieftains, and kings; concluded treaties and pacts;
and took command in battle. In short, he fulfilled all the functions of government.
Second, he designated a ruler to succeed him, in accordance with divine command. If
God Almighty, through the Prophet (s), designated a man who was to rule over
Muslim society after him, this is in itself an indication that government remains a
necessity after the departure of the Prophet from this world. Again, since the Most
184
    Valī-yi Amr: “the one who holds authority,” a term derived from Qur’an, 4:59: “O you who believe!
Obey God, and obey the Messenger and the holders of authority (ūli ’l-amr) from among you.” For
commentary of this verse, see Mīr Ahmad ‘Ali, The Holy Qur’an (NY: Tahrike Tarsile Qur’an, 1988),
185
    Sunnah: the practice of the Prophet, accepted by Muslims as the norm and ideal for all human
behavior.


18                                                                           Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
Noble Messenger (s) promulgated the divine command through his act of appointing a
successor, he also, implicitly stated the necessity for establishing a government.
It is self-evident that the necessity for enactment of the law, which necessitated the
formation of a government by the Prophet (s), was confined or restricted to his time,
but continues after his departure from this world. According to one of the noble verses
of the Qur’an, the ordinances of Islam are not limited with respect to time or place;
they are permanent and must be enacted until the end of time.26a They were not
revealed merely for the time of the Prophet, only to be abandoned thereafter, with
retribution and the penal code no longer be enacted, or the taxes prescribed by Islam
no longer collected, and the defense of the lands and people of Islam suspended. The
claim that the laws of Islam may remain in abeyance or are restricted to a particular
time or place is contrary to the essential creedal bases of Islam. Since enactment of
laws, then, is necessary after the departure of the Prophet from this world, and indeed,
will remain so until the end of time, the formation of a government and the
establishment of executive and administrative organs are also necessary. Without the
formation of a government and the establishment of such organs to ensure that
through enactment of the law, all activities of the individual take place in the
framework of a just system, chaos and anarchy will prevail and social, intellectual and
moral corruption will arise. The only way to prevent the emergence of anarchy and
disorder and to protect society from corruption is to form a government and thus
impart order to all the affairs of the country.
Both reason and divine law, then, demonstrate the necessity in our time for what was
necessary during the lifetime of the Prophet (s) and the age of the Commander of the
Faithful, ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib (‘a)—namely the formation of a government and the
establishment of executive and administrative organs.
In order to clarify the matter further, let us pose the following question. From the time
of the Lesser Occultation186 down to the present (a period of more than twelve
centuries that may continue for hundreds of millennia if it is not appropriate for the
Occulted Imām to manifest himself), is it proper that the laws of Islam be cast aside
and remain unexecuted, so that everyone acts as he pleases and anarchy prevails?
Were the laws that the Prophet of Islam labored so hard for twenty-three years to set
forth, promulgate, and execute valid only for a limited period of time? Was everything
pertaining to Islam meant to be abandoned after the Lesser Occultation? Anyone who
believes so, or voices such a belief, is worse situated than the person who believes and
proclaims that Islam has been superseded or abrogated by another supposed
revelation.187


26a
    See, for example, Sūrah Ibrāhīm (14:52), Sūrah Yūnus (10:2), Sūrah al-Hājj (22:49), Sūrah al-
Ahzāb (33:40), and Sūrah Yā-Sīn (36:70). [Pub.]
186
    Lesser Occultation: ghaybat-i sughrah, the period of about 70 years (260/872-329/939) when,
according to Shī‘i belief, Muhammad al-Mahdi, the Twelfth Imām, absented himself from the physical
plane but remained in communication with his followers through a succession of four appointed
deputies, viz., ‘Uthmān ibn Sa‘īd, Muhammad ibn ‘Uthmān, Husayn ibn Rūh, and ‘Ali ibn
Muhammad. At the death of the fourth deputies no successor was named, and the Greater Occultation
(ghaybat-i kubrah) began, and continues to this day. See Muhammad Bāqir as-Sadr and Murtadā
Mutahhari, Awaited Saviour (Karachi: Islamic Seminary Publications); Muhammad Bāqir as-Sadr, An
Inquiry Concerning Al-Mahdi (Qum: Ansariyan Publications); Jassim M. Husain, The Occultation of
the Twelfth Imām: A Historical Background (London: Muhammadi Trust, 1982); Ibrāhīm Amīni, Al-
Imām Al-Mahdī: The Just Leader of Humanity, trans. ‘Abdul ‘Azīz Sachedina (Qum: Ansariyan
Publications),
187
    The allusion is probably to the Bahā’is, who claim to have received a succession of post-Qur’anic
revelations.


19                                                                           Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
No one can say it is no longer necessary to defend the frontiers and the territorial
integrity of the Islamic homeland; that taxes such as the jizyah, kharāj, khums, and
zakāt188 should no longer be collected; that the penal code of Islam, with its provisions
for the payment of blood money and the exacting of requital, should be suspended.
Any person who claims that the formation of an Islamic government is not necessary
implicitly denies the necessity for the implementation of Islamic law, the universality
and comprehensiveness of that law, and the eternal validity of the faith itself.
After the death of the Most Noble Messenger (s), none of the Muslims doubted the
necessity for government. No one said: “We no longer need a government”. No one
was heard to say anything of the kind. There was unanimous agreement concerning
the necessity for government. There was disagreement only as to which person should
assume responsibility for government and head the state. Government, therefore, was
established after the Prophet (s), both in the time of the caliphs and in that of the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a); an apparatus of government came into existence with
administrative and executive organs.
The nature and character of Islamic law and the divine ordinances of the sharī‘ah
furnish additional proof of the necessity for establishing government, for they indicate
that the laws were laid down for the purpose of creating a state and administering the
political, economic and cultural affairs of society.
Firstly, the laws of the sharī‘ah embrace a diverse body of laws and regulation, which
amounts to a complete social system. In this system of laws, all the needs of man have
been met: his dealings with his neighbors, fellow citizens, and clan, as well as
children and relatives; the concerns of private and marital life; regulations concerning
war and peace and intercourse with other nations; penal and commercial law; and
regulations pertaining to trade, industry and agriculture. Islamic law contains
provisions relating to the preliminaries of marriage and the form in which it should be
contracted, and others relating to the development of the embryo in the womb, and
what food the parents should eat at the time of conception. It further stipulates the
duties that are incumbent upon them while the infant is being suckled, and specifies
how the child should be reared, and how the husband and the wife should relate to
each other and to their children. Islam provides laws and instructions for all of these
matters, aiming, as it does, to produce integrated and virtuous human beings who are
walking embodiments of the law, or to put it differently, the law’s voluntary and
instinctive executors. It is obvious, then, how much care Islam devotes to government
and the political and economic relations of society, with goal of creating conditions
conducive to the production of morally upright and virtuous human beings.
The Glorious Qur’an and the Sunnah contain all the laws and ordinances man needs in
order to attain happiness and the perfection of his state. The book al-Kāfi189 has a
chapter entitled, “All the Needs of Men Are Set Out in the Book and the Sunnah,”30a
the “Book” meaning the Qur’an, which is, in its own words, “an exposition of all

188
    Jizyah: a tax levied on non-Muslim citizens of the Muslim state in exchange for the protection they
receive and in lieu of the taxes, such as zakāt, that only Muslims pay. Kharaj: a tax levied on certain
categories of land. Khums: a tax consisting of one-fifth of agricultural and commercial profits (see p. 24
and Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi, Khums). Zakāt: the tax levied on various categories of wealth and spent
on the purposes specified in Qur’an, 9:60. [Pub.]
189
    Al-Kāfi: more fully, Al-Kāfi fī ’l Hadīth, one of the most important Shī‘i collections of hadīth,
compiled by Shaykh Abū Ja‘far Muhammad ibn Ya‘qūb al-Kulayni (d. 329/941). This treatise consists
of 34 books, 326 sections, and over 16,000 ahādīth. Two fascicules of this work have been translated
into English by Sayyid Muhammad Hasan Rizvi and published by the Tehran-based World
Organization for Islamic Services (WOFIS),
30a
    Usūl al-Kāfi, Book of “Virtues of Knowledge,” vol. 1, pp. 76-80. [Pub.]


20                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
things.”190 According to certain traditions, the Imām191 also swears that the Book and
the Sunnah contain without a doubt all that men need.
Second, if we examine closely the nature and character of the provisions of the law,
we realize that their execution and implementation depend upon the formation of a
government, and that it is impossible to fulfill the duty of executing God’s commands
without there being established properly comprehensive administrative and executive
organs. Let us now mention certain types of provisions in order to illustrate this point;
the others you can examine yourselves.
The taxes Islam levies and the form of budget it has established are not merely for the
sake of providing subsistence to the poor or feeding the indigent among the
descendants of the Prophet (s); they are also intended to make possible, the
establishment of a great government and to assure its essential expenditures.
For example, khums is a huge source of income that accrues to the treasury and
represents one item in the budget. According to our Shī‘i school of thought, khums is
to be levied in an equitable manner on all agricultural and commercial profits and all
natural resources whether above or below the ground—in short, on all forms of wealth
and income. It applies equally to the greengrocer with his stall outside this mosque,
and to the shipping or mining magnate. They must all pay one-fifth of their surplus
income, after customary expenses are deducted, to the Islamic ruler, so that it enters
the treasury. It is obvious that such a huge income serves the purpose of administering
the Islamic state and meeting all its financial needs. If we were to calculate one-fifth
of the surplus income of all the Muslim countries (or of the whole world, should it
enter the fold of Islam), it would become fully apparent that the purpose for the
imposition of such a tax is not merely the upkeep of the sayyids192 or the religious
scholars, but on the contrary, something far more significant—namely, meeting the
financial needs of the great organs and institutions of government. If an Islamic
government is achieved, it will have to be administered on the basis of the taxes that
Islam has established—khums, zakāt (this, of course, would not represent an
appreciable sum)193 jizyah, and kharāj.
How could the sayyids ever need so vast a budget? The khums of the bazaar of
Baghdad would be enough for the needs of the sayyids and the upkeep of the religious
teaching institution, as well as all the poor of the Islamic world, quite apart from the
khums of the bazaars of Tehran, Istanbul, Cairo, and other cities. The provision of
such a huge budget must obviously be for the purpose of forming a government and
administering the Islamic lands. It was established with the aim of providing for the
needs of the people, for public services relating to health, education, defense, and
economic development. Further, in accordance with the procedures laid down by
Islam for the collection, preservation, and expenditure of this income, all forms of
usurpation and embezzlement of public wealth have been forbidden; so that the head
of state and all those entrusted with responsibility for conducting public affairs (i.e.,
members of the government) have no privileges over the ordinary citizen in benefiting
from the public income and wealth; all have an equal share.
190
    Qur’an, 16:89.
191
    The reference is probably to Imām Ja‘far as-Sādiq, whose sayings on this subject are quoted by
‘Allāmah Tabātabā’i in al-Mīzān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān (Beirut, 1390/1979), XII, 327-328. First eight
volumes of ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’i’s Al-Mīzān has been translated into English by Sayyid Saeed Akhtar
Rizvi and published by the WOFIS. [Pub.]
192
    Sayyids: the descendants of the Prophet through his daughter Fātimah and son-in-law ‘Ali, the first
of the Twelve Imāms.
193
    Zakāt would not represent an appreciable sum presumably because it is levied on surplus wealth, the
accumulation of which is inhibited by the economic system of Islam.


21                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
Now, should we cast this huge treasury into the ocean, or bury it until the Imām
returns, or just spend it on fifty sayyids a day until they have all eaten their fill? Let us
suppose we give all this money to 500,000 sayyids; they would not know what to do
with it. We all know that the sayyids and the poor have a claim on the public treasury
only to the extent required for subsistence. The budget of the Islamic state is
constructed in such a way that every source of income is allocated to specific types of
expenditures. Zakāt, voluntary contributions and charitable donations, and khums are
all levied and spent separately. There is a hadīth to the effect that at the end of the
year, sayyids must return any surplus from what they have received to the Islamic
ruler, just as the ruler must aid them if they are in need.
The jizyah, which is imposed on the ahl adh-dhimmah,194 and the kharāj, which is
levied on agricultural land, represent two additional sources of considerable income.
The establishment of these taxes also proves that the existence of a ruler and a
government is necessary. It is the duty of a ruler or governor to assess the poll tax to
be levied on the ahl adh-dhimmah in accordance with their income and financial
capacity, and to fix appropriate taxes on their arable lands and livestock. He must also
collect the kharāj on those broad lands that are the “property of God” and in the
possession of the Islamic state. This task requires the existence of orderly institutions,
rules and regulations, and administrative procedures and policies; it cannot be fulfilled
in the absence of order. It is the responsibility of those in charge of the Islamic state,
first, to assess the taxes in due and appropriate measure and in accordance with the
public good; then, to collect them; and finally, to spend them in a manner conducive
to the welfare of the Muslims.
Thus, you see that the fiscal provisions of Islam also point to the necessity for
establishing a government, for they cannot be fulfilled without the establishment of
the appropriate Islamic institutions.
The ordinances pertaining to preservation of the Islamic system and defense of the
territorial integrity and independence of the Islamic ummah195 also demanded the
formation of a government. An example is the command: “Prepare against them
whatever force you can muster and horses tethered” (Qur’an, 8:60), which enjoins the
preparation of as much armed defensive force as possible and orders the Muslims to
be always on the alert and at the ready, even in time of peace.
If the Muslims had acted in accordance with this command, and after forming a
government, made the necessary extensive preparations to be in a state of full
readiness for war, a handful of Jews would never have dared to occupy our lands and
to burn and destroy the Masjid al-Aqsā196 without the people’s being capable of
making an immediate response. All this has resulted from the failure of the Muslims
to fulfill their duty of executing God’s law and setting up a righteous and respectable
government. If the rulers of the Muslim countries truly represented the believers and
enacted God’s ordinances, they would set aside their petty differences, abandon their
subversive and divisive activities, and join together like the fingers of one hand. Then
a handful of wretched Jews (the agents of America, Britain and other foreign powers)
would never have been able to accomplish what they have, no matter how much


194
    Ahl adh-Dhimmah: non-Muslim citizens of the Muslim state, whose rights and obligations are
contractually determined.
195
    Ummah: the entire Islamic community, without territorial or ethnic distinction.
196
    Masjid al-Aqsā: the site in Jerusalem where the Prophet ascended to heaven in the eleventh year of
his mission (Qur’an, 17:1); also the complex of mosques and buildings erected on the site. The chief of
these was extensively damaged by arson in 1969, two years after the Zionist usurpation of Jerusalem.


22                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
support they enjoyed from America and Britain. All this has happened because of the
incompetence of those who rule over the Muslims.
The verse: “Prepare against them whatever force you can muster” commands you to
be as strong and well-prepared as possible, so that your enemies will be unable to
oppress you and transgress against you. It is because we have been lacking in unity,
strength, and preparedness that we suffer oppression and are at the mercy of foreign
aggressors.
There are numerous provisions of the law that cannot be implemented without the
establishment of a government apparatus; for example, blood money, which must be
exacted and delivered to those deserving it, or the corporeal penalties imposed by the
law, which must be carried out under the supervision of the Islamic ruler. All of these
laws refer back to the institutions of government for it is the government power alone
that is capable of fulfilling this function.
After the death of the Most Noble Messenger (s), the obstinate enemies of the faith,
the Umayyads197 (God’s curses be upon them), did not permit the Islamic state to
attain stability with the rule of ‘Ali ibn Abi Tālib (‘a). They did not allow a form of
government to exist that was pleasing to God, Exalted and Almighty, and to His Most
Noble Messenger (s). They transformed the entire basis of government, and their
policies were, for the most part, contradictory to Islam. The form of government of
the Umayyads and the Abbasids,198 and the political and administrative policies they
pursued, were anti-Islamic. The form of government was thoroughly perverted by
being transformed into a monarchy, like those of the kings of Iran, the emperors of
Rome, and the pharaohs of Egypt. For the most part, this non-Islamic form of
government has persisted to the present day, as we can see.
Both law and reason require that we not permit governments to retain this non-Islamic
or anti-Islamic character. The proofs are clear. First, the existence of a non-Islamic
political order necessarily results in the non-implementation of the Islamic political
order. Then, all non-Islamic systems of government are the systems of kufr199 since
the ruler in each case is an instance of tāghūt,200 and it is our duty to remove from the
life of Muslim society all traces of kufr and destroy them. It is also our duty to create a
favorable social environment for the education of believing and virtuous individuals,
an environment that is in total contradiction with that produced by the rule of tāghūt
and illegitimate power. The social environment created by tāghūt and shirk201
invariably brings about corruption such as you can observe now in Iran, the same
corruption termed “corruption on earth.”202 This corruption must be swept away, and

197
    Umayyads: descendants of ‘Umayyah ibn ‘Abdu Shams ibn ‘Abdu Manāf from the Quraysh tribe,
and members of the dynasty that ruled at Damascus from 41/632 until 132/750 and transformed the
caliphate into a hereditary institution. Mu‘āwiyah, ibn Abū Sufyān frequently mentioned in these
pages, was the first of the Umayyad line. This kingdom ended with the murder of Marwān II, the last
Umayyad caliph. [Pub.]
198
    Abbasids: offspring of ‘Abbās ibn ‘Abdul Muttalib, uncle of the Holy Prophet (s), and the dynasty
that replaced the Umayyads and established a new caliphal capital in Baghdad. This dynastic rule
began in 132/750 with the caliphate of ‘Abdullāh as-Saffāh. With the rise of various local rulers,
generally of military origin, the power of the Abbasids began to decline from the fourth/tenth century
and it was brought to an end by the Mongol conquest in 656/1258. [Pub.]
199
    Kufr: the rejection of divine guidance; the antithesis of Islam.
200
    Tāghūt: one who surpasses all bounds in his despotism and tyranny and claims the prerogatives of
divinity for himself, whether explicitly or implicitly. See also p. 78-79.
201
    Shirk: the assignment of partners to God, either by believing in a multiplicity of gods, or by
assigning divine attributes and prerogatives to other-than-God.
202
    “Corruption on earth”: a broad term including not only moral corruption, but also subversion of the
public good, embezzlement and usurpation of public wealth, conspiring with the enemies of the


23                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
its instigators should be punished for their deeds. It is the same corruption that the
Pharaoh generated in Egypt with his policies, so that the Qur’an says of him, “Truly,
he was among the corruptors” (28:4). A believing, pious, just individual cannot
possibly exist in a socio-political environment of this nature, and still maintain his
faith and righteous conduct. He is faced with two choices: either he commits acts that
amount to kufr and contradict righteousness, or in order not to commit such acts and
not to submit to the orders and commands of tāghūt, the just individual opposes him
and struggles against him in order to destroy the environment of corruption. We have
in reality, then, no choice but to destroy those systems of government that are corrupt
in themselves and also entail the corruption of others, and to overthrow all
treacherous, corrupt, oppressive, and criminal regimes.
This is a duty that all Muslims must fulfill, in every one of the Muslim countries, in
order to achieve the triumphant political revolution of Islam.
We see, too, that together, the imperialists and the tyrannical self-seeking rulers have
divided the Islamic homeland. They have separated the various segments of the
Islamic ummah from each other and artificially created separate nations. There once
existed the great Ottoman State, and that, too, the imperialists divided. Russia, Britain,
Austria, and other imperialist powers united, and through wars against the Ottomans,
each came to occupy or absorb into its sphere of influence, part of the Ottoman realm.
It is true that most of the Ottoman rulers were incompetent, that some of them were
corrupt, and that they followed the monarchical system. Nonetheless, the existence of
the Ottoman State represented a threat to the imperialists. It was always possible that
righteous individuals might rise up among the people and, with their assistance, seize
control of the state, thus putting an end to imperialism by mobilizing the unified
resources of the nation. Therefore after numerous prior wars, the imperialists at the
end of World War I divided the Ottoman State, creating in its territories about ten or
fifteen petty states.203 Then each of these was entrusted to one of their servants or a
group of their servants, although certain countries were later able to escape the grasp
of the agents of imperialism.
In order to assure the unity of the Islamic ummah, in order to liberate the Islamic
homeland from occupation and penetration by the imperialists and their puppet
governments, it is imperative that we establish a government. In order to attain the
unity and freedom of the Muslim peoples, we must overthrow the oppressive
governments installed by the imperialists and bring into existence an Islamic
government of justice that will be in the service of the people. The formation of such a
government will serve to preserve the disciplined unity of the Muslims; just as
Fātimah az-Zahrā204 (‘a) said in her address: “The Imamate exists for the sake of
preserving order among the Muslims and replacing their disunity with unity”.
         Through the political agents they have placed in power over the people, the
imperialists have imposed on us an unjust economic order, and thereby divided our

community against its security, and working in general for the overthrow of the Islamic order. See the
commentary on Qur’an, 5:33 in Tabātabā’i’s, al-Mīzān, V, 330-332.
203
    It may be apposite to quote here the following passage from a secret report drawn up in January
1916 by Thomas E. Lawrence, the British organizer of the so-called Arab revolt led by Sharīf Husayn
of Mecca: “Husayn’s activity seems beneficial to us, because it matches with our immediate aims, the
breakup of the Islamic bloc and the defeat and disruption of the Ottoman Empire…. The Arabs are
even less stable than the Turks. If properly handled they would remain in a state of political mosaic, a
tissue of small jealous principalities incapable of political cohesion.” See Philip Knightley and Colin
Simpson, The Secret Lives of Lawrence of Arabia (New York, 1971), p. 55.
204
    Fātimah az-Zahrā: Fātimah, the daughter of the Prophet and wife of Imām ‘Ali. For her biography,
see Fātimah the Gracious (Qum: Ansariyan Publications). [Pub.]


24                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
people into two groups: oppressors and oppressed. Hundreds of millions of Muslims
are hungry and deprived of all forms of health care and education, while minorities
comprised of the wealthy and powerful live a life of indulgence, licentiousness, and
corruption. The hungry and deprived have constantly struggled to free themselves
from the oppression of their plundering overlords, and their struggle continues to this
day. But their way is blocked by the ruling minorities and the oppressive
governmental structures they head. It is our duty to save the oppressed and deprived.
It is our duty to be a helper to the oppressed, and an enemy to the oppressor. This is
nothing other than the duty that the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) entrusted to his
two great offspring205 in his celebrated testament: “Be an enemy to the oppressor and
a helper to the oppressed.”46a
         The scholars of Islam have a duty to struggle against all attempts by
oppressors to establish a monopoly over the sources of wealth or to make illicit use of
them. They must not allow the masses to remain hungry and deprived while
plundering oppressors usurp the sources of wealth and live in opulence. The
Commander of the Faithful (‘a) says: “I have accepted the task of government because
God, Exalted and Almighty, has exacted from the scholars of Islam a pledge not to sit
silent and idle in the face of gluttony and plundering of the oppressors, on the one
hand, and the hunger and deprivation of the oppressed, on the other.” Here is the full
text of the passage we refer to:

         “I swear by Him Who causes the seed to open and creates the souls of all living things that
         were it not for the presence of those who have come to swear allegiance to me, were it not for
         the obligation of rulership now imposed upon me by the availability of aid and support, and
         were it not for the pledge that God has taken from the scholars of Islam not to remain silent in
         the face of the gluttony and plundering of the oppressors, on the one hand, and the harrowing
         hunger and deprivation of the oppressed, on the other hand---were it not for all of this, then I
         would abandon the reins of government and in no way seek it. You would see that this world
         of yours, with all of its position and rank, is less in my eyes than the moisture that comes from
         the sneeze of a goat.”206

        How can we stay silent and idle today when we see that a band of traitors and
usurpers, the agents of foreign powers, have appropriated the wealth and the fruits of
labor of hundreds of millions of Muslims—thanks to the support of their masters and
through the power of the bayonet—granting the Muslim not the least right to
prosperity? It is the duty of Islamic scholars and all Muslims to put an end to this
system of oppression and, for the sake of the well-being of hundreds of millions of
human beings, to overthrow these oppressive governments and form an Islamic
government.
        Reason, the laws of Islam, and the practice of the Prophet (s), and that of the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a), the purport of various Qur’anic verses and Prophetic
traditions—all indicate the necessity of forming a government. As an example of the
traditions of the Imāms, I now quote the following tradition of Imām Ridā207 (‘a):

205
    I.e., Hasan and Husayn.
46a
    Nahj al-Balāghah, Letter 47. See English translation of Nahj al-Balāghah, Peak of Eloquence with
commentary and its original Arabic text (Qum: Ansariyan Publications).
206
     Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 3 (The famous Shaqshaqiyyah Sermon). See Nahj al-Balāghah, ed.
Subhi as-Sālih. [Pub.]
207
    Imām Ridā: eighth of the Twelve Imāms, born in 148/765 and died in 203/817 in Tūs (Mashhad).
He was poisoned by the Abbasid caliph Ma’mūn, who had appointed him as his successor at first, but
then grew fearful of the wide following he commanded (see p. 137). His shrine in Mashhad is one of
the principal centers of pilgrimage and religious learning in Iran. See Bāqir Sharīf al-Qarashi, The Life


25                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
                   ‘Abd al-Wāhid ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abdus an-Neyshābūri al-‘Attār said: “I was told
         by Abū ’l-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Qutayba an-Neyshābūri that he was told by Abū
         Muhammad al-Fadl ibn Shadhan an-Neyshābūri this tradition. If someone asks, ‘Why has
         God, the All-Wise, appointed the holders of authority and commanded us to obey them?’ then
         we answer, ‘For numerous reasons. One reason is this: Men are commanded to observe certain
         limits and not to transgress them in order to avoid the corruption that would result. This
         cannot be attained or established without there being appointed over them a trustee who will
         ensure that they remain within the limits of the licit and prevent them from casting themselves
         into the danger of transgression. Were it not for such a trustee, no one would abandon his own
         pleasure and benefit because of the corruption it might entail for another. Another reason is
         that we find no group or nation of men that ever existed without a ruler and leader, since it is
         required by both religion and worldly interest. It would not be compatible with divine wisdom
         to leave mankind to its own devices, for He, the All-Wise, knows that men need a ruler for
         their survival. It is through the leadership he provides that men make war against their
         enemies, divide among themselves the spoils of war, and preserve their communal solidarity,
         preventing the oppression of the oppressed by the oppressor.
                   “ ‘A further reason is this: were God not to appoint over men a solicitous,
         trustworthy, protecting, reliable leader, the community would decline, religion would depart,
         and the norms and ordinances that have been revealed would undergo change. Innovators
         would increase and deniers would erode religion, inducing doubt in the Muslims. For we see
         that men are needy and defective, judging by their differences of opinion and inclination and
         their diversity of state. Were a trustee, then, not appointed to preserve what has been revealed
         through the Prophet (s), corruption would ensue in the manner we have described. Revealed
         laws, norms, ordinances, and faith would be altogether changed, and therein would lie the
         corruption of all mankind.’ ”208

We have omitted the first part of the hadīth, which pertains to prophethood, a topic
not germane to our present discussion. What interests us at present is the second half,
which I will now paraphrase for you.
        If someone should ask you, “Why has God, the All-Wise, appointed holders of
authority and commanded you to obey them?” you should answer him as follows: “He
has done so for various causes and reasons. One is that men have been set upon a
certain well- defined path, and commanded not to stray from it, nor to transgress
against the established limits and norms, for if they were to stray, they would fall prey
to corruption. Now men would not be able to keep to their ordained path and to enact
God’s laws unless a trustworthy and protective individual (or power) were appointed
over them with responsibility for this matter, to prevent them from stepping outside
the sphere of the licit and transgressing against the rights of others. If no such
restraining individual or power were appointed, nobody would voluntarily abandon
any pleasure or interest of his own that might result in harm or corruption to others;
everybody would engage in oppressing and harming others for the sake of his own
pleasures and interests.
        “Another reason and cause is this: we do not see a single group, nation, or
religious community that has ever been able to exist without an individual entrusted
with the maintenance of its laws and institutions—in short, a head or a leader; for
such a person is essential for fulfilling the affairs of religion and the world. It is not
permissible, therefore, according to divine wisdom that God should leave men, His
creatures, without a leader and guide, for He knows well that they depend on the

of Imām ‘Ali bin Mūsā al-Ridā, trans. Jāsim al-Rasheed (Qum: Ansariyan Publications); Muhammad
Jawād Fadlallāh, Imam al-Ridā: A Historical and Biographical Research, trans. Yāsīn T. al-Jibouri;
Muhammad Mahdi Shams ad-Dīn, “Al-Imām ar-Ridā (‘a).
208
    The text of this tradition can be found in Shaykh Sadūq, ‘Ilal ash-Sharāi‘ (Qum, 1378/1958), I, sec.
182, hadīth 9, p. 251. [Pub.]


26                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
existence of such a person for their own survival and perpetuation. It is under his
leadership that they fight against their enemies, divide the public income among
themselves, perform Friday and other congregational prayers and foreshorten the arms
of the transgressors who would encroach on the rights of the oppressed.
        “Another proof and cause is this: were God not to appoint an Imām over men
to maintain law and order, to serve the people faithfully as a vigilant trustee, religion
would fall victim to obsolescence and decay. Its rites and institutions would vanish;
the customs and ordinances of Islam would be transformed or even deformed.
Heretical innovators would add things to religion and atheists and unbelievers would
subtract things from it, presenting it to the Muslims in an inaccurate manner. For we
see that men are prey to defects; they are not perfect, and must need to strive for
perfection. Moreover, they disagree with each other, having varying inclinations and
discordant states. If God, therefore, had not appointed over men one who would
maintain order and law and protect the revelation brought by the Prophet (s), in the
manner we have described, men would have fallen prey to corruption; the institutions,
laws, customs, and ordinances of Islam would be transformed; and faith and its
content would be completely changed, resulting in the corruption of all humanity.”
        As you can deduce from the words of the Imām (‘a), there are numerous
proofs and causes that necessitate formation of a government, and establishment of an
authority. These proofs, causes, and arguments are not temporary in their validity or
limited to a particular time, and the necessity for the formation of a government,
therefore, is perpetual. For example, it will always happen that men overstep the
limits laid down by Islam and transgress against the rights of others for the sake of
their personal pleasure and benefit. It cannot be asserted that such was the case only in
the time of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), and that afterwards, men became
angels. The wisdom of the Creator has decreed that men should live in accordance
with justice and act within the limits set by divine law. This wisdom is eternal and
immutable, and constitutes one of the norms of God Almighty. Today and always,
therefore, the existence of a holder of authority, a ruler who acts as trustee and
maintains the institutions and laws of Islam, is a necessity—a ruler who prevents
cruelty, oppression, and violation of the rights of others; who is a trustworthy and
vigilant guardian of God’s creatures; who guides men to the teachings, doctrines,
laws, and institutions of Islam; and who prevents the undesirable changes that atheists
and the enemies of religion wish to introduce in the laws and institutions of Islam. Did
not the caliphate of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) serve this purpose? The same
factors of necessity that led him to become the Imām still exist; the only difference is
that no single individual has been designated for the task.209 The principle of the
necessity of government has been made a general one, so that it will always remain in
effect.
        If the ordinances of Islam are to remain in effect, then, if encroachment by
oppressive ruling classes on the rights of the weak is to be prevented, if ruling
minorities are not to be permitted to plunder and corrupt the people for the sake of
pleasure and material interest, if the Islamic order is to be preserved and all
individuals are to pursue the just path of Islam without any deviation, if innovations
and the approval of anti-Islamic laws by sham parliaments210 are to be prevented, if

209
    That is, in the absence of the Imām or an individual deputy named by him (as was the case during
the Lesser Occultation), the task devolves upon the fuqahā as a class. See argument on pp. 44-112.
210
    Here the allusion may be in particular to the so-called Family Protection Law of 1967, which Imām
Khomeini denounced as contrary to Islam in an important ruling. See Imām Khomeini, Tauzih al-
Masā’il, n.p., n.d., pp. 462-463, par. 2836, and p. 441.


27                                                                           Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
the influence of foreign powers in the Islamic lands is to be destroyed—government is
necessary. None of these aims can be achieved without government and the organs of
the state. It is a righteous government, of course, that is needed; one presided over by
a ruler who will be a trustworthy and righteous trustee. Those who presently govern
us are of no use at all for they are tyrannical, corrupt, and highly incompetent.
        In the past, we did not act in concert and unanimity in order to establish proper
government and overthrow treacherous and corrupt rulers. Some people were
apathetic and reluctant even to discuss the theory of Islamic government, and some
went so far as to praise oppressive rulers. It is for this reason that we find ourselves in
the present state. The influence and sovereignty of Islam in society have declined; the
nation of Islam has fallen victim to division and weakness; the laws of Islam have
remained in abeyance and been subjected to change and modification; and the
imperialists have propagated foreign laws and alien culture among the Muslims
through their agents for the sake of their evil purposes, causing people to be infatuated
with the West. It was our lack of a leader, a guardian, and our lack of institutions of
leadership that made all this possible. We need righteous and proper organs of
government; that much is self-evident.




28                                                                   Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
                      THE FORM OF
                  ISLAMIC GOVERNMENT

        ISLAMIC GOVERNMENT does not correspond to any of the existing forms
of government. For example, it is not a tyranny, where the head of state can deal
arbitrarily with the property and lives of the people, making use of them as he wills,
putting to death anyone he wishes, and enriching anyone he wishes by granting landed
estates and distributing the property and holdings of the people. The Most Noble
Messenger (s), the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), and the other caliphs did not have
such powers. Islamic government is neither tyrannical nor absolute, but constitutional.
It is not constitutional in the current sense of the word, i.e., based on the approval of
laws in accordance with the opinion of the majority. It is constitutional in the sense
that the rulers are subject to a certain set of conditions in governing and administering
the country, conditions that are set forth in the Noble Qur’an and the Sunnah of the
Most Noble Messenger (s). It is the laws and ordinances of Islam comprising this set
of conditions that must be observed and practiced. Islamic government may therefore
be defined as the rule of divine law over men.
        The fundamental difference between Islamic government, on the one hand,
and constitutional monarchies and republics, on the other, is this: whereas the
representatives of the people or the monarch in such regimes engage in legislation, in
Islam the legislative power and competence to establish laws belongs exclusively to
God Almighty. The Sacred Legislator of Islam is the sole legislative power. No one
has the right to legislate and no law may be executed except the law of the Divine
Legislator. It is for this reason that in an Islamic government, a simple planning body
takes the place of the legislative assembly that is one of the three branches of
government. This body draws up programs for the different ministries in the light of
the ordinances of Islam and thereby determines how public services are to be provided
across the country.
        The body of Islamic laws that exist in the Qur’an and Sunnah            has been
accepted by the Muslims and recognized by them as worthy of obedience. This
consent and acceptance facilitates the task of government and makes it truly belong to
the people. In contrast, in a republic or a constitutional monarchy, most of those
claiming to be representatives of the majority of people approve anything they wish as
law and then impose it on the entire population.
        Islamic government is a government of law. In this form of government,
sovereignty belongs to God alone and law is His decree and command. The law of
Islam, divine command, has absolute authority over all individuals and the Islamic
government. Everyone, including the Most Noble Messenger (s) and his successors, is
subject to law and will remain so for all eternity—the law that has been revealed by
God, Almighty and Exalted, and expounded by the tongue of the Qur’an and the Most
Noble Messenger (s). If the Prophet (s) assumed the task of divine viceregency upon
earth, it was in accordance with divine command. God, Almighty and Exalted,
appointed him as His viceregent, “the viceregent of God upon earth”; he did not
establish a government on his own initiative in order to be leader of the Muslims.
Similarly, when it became apparent that disagreements would probably arise among
the Muslims because their acquaintance with the faith was recent and limited, God
Almighty charged the Prophet (s), by way of revelation, to clarify the question of


29                                                                  Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
succession immediately, there in the middle of the desert. Then the Most Noble
Messenger (s), nominated the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) as his successor, in
conformity and obedience to the law, not because he was his own son-in-law or had
performed certain services, but because, he was acting in obedience to God’s law, as
its executor.211
         In Islam, then, government has the sense of adherence to law; it is law alone
that rules over society. Even the limited powers given to the Most Noble Messenger
(s) and those exercising rule after him have been conferred upon them by God.
Whenever the Prophet (s) expounded a certain matter or promulgated a certain
injunction, he did so in obedience to divine law, a law that everyone without
exception must obey and adhere to. Divine law obtains both for the leader and the led;
the sole law that is valid and imperative to apply is the law of God. Obedience to the
Prophet (s) also takes place in accordance with divine decree, for God says: “And
obey the Messenger”(Qur’an, 4:59). Obedience to those entrusted with authority is
also on the basis of divine decree: “And obey the holders of authority from among
you”(Qur’an, 4:59). Individual opinion, even if it be that of the Prophet (s) himself,
cannot intervene in matters of divine law; here, all are subject to the will of God.
         Islamic government is not a form of monarchy, especially not an imperial one.
In that type of government, the rulers are empowered over the property and persons of
those they rule and may dispose of them entirely as they wish. Islam has not the
slightest connection with this form and method of government. For this reason, we
find that in Islamic government, unlike monarchial and imperial regimes, there is not
the slightest trace of vast palaces, opulent buildings, servants and retainers, private
equerries, adjutants to the heir apparent, and all the other appurtenances of monarchy
that consume as much as half of the national budget. You all know how the Prophet
(s) lived, the Prophet who was the head of the Islamic state and its ruler. The same
mode of life was preserved until the beginning of the Umayyad period. The first two
[caliphs] adhered to the Prophet’s (s) example in the outer conduct of their personal
lives, even though in other affairs they acted to the contrary, which led to the grave
deviations that appeared in the time of ‘Uthmān, the same deviations that have
inflicted on us these misfortunes of the present day.212 In the time of the Commander
of the Faithful (‘a), the system of government was corrected and a proper form and
method of rule were followed. Even though that excellent man ruled over a vast realm
that included Iran, Egypt, Hijāz213 and the Yemen among its provinces, he lived more
frugally than the most impoverished of our clergy students. According to tradition, he
once bought two tunics, and finding one of them better than the other, he gave the
better one to his servant Qanbar. The other he kept for himself, and since its sleeves
were too long for him, he tore off the extra portion.54a In this torn garment, the ruler of
a great, populous, and prosperous realm clothed himself.


211
    It is referring to the Prophet’s appointment of Imām ‘Ali as his successor at a gathering near the
pool of Khumm during his return to Medina from Mecca, after having performed the last pilgrimage in
his life. See Muhammad Bāqir as-Sadr, Ghadīr (Qum: Ansariyan Publications).
212
    The attribution of errors to Abū Bakr and ‘Umar and deviations to ‘Uthmān is a part of Shī‘i belief
and is entirely to be expected in this context. See Ibn Abil Hadīd, Sharh-i Nahj al-Balāghah, vol. 2,
commentary on Sermon 30, pp. 126-161 and pp. 324-333; vol. 3, commentary on Sermon 43, 3-69; vol.
9, commentary on Sermon 135, pp. 3-30; and Al-Ghadīr, vol. 8, pp. 97-323. Worthy of note, however,
is the statement here that Abū Bakr and ‘Umar adhered to the example of the Prophet in their personal
lives. See also the statement on p. 37. [Pub.]
213
    Hijāz: the region in Western Arabia that includes Mecca and Medina.
54a
    Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 40, p. 324.


30                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
        If this mode of conduct had been preserved, and government had retained its
Islamic form, there would have been no monarchy and no empire, no usurpation of
the lives and property of the people, no oppression and plunder, no encroachment on
the public treasury, no vice and abomination. Most forms of corruption originate with
the ruling class, the tyrannical ruling family and the libertines that associate with
them. It is these rulers who establish centers of vice and corruption, who build centers
of vice and wine-drinking, and spend the income of the religious endowments
constructing cinemas.214
        If it were not for these profligate royal ceremonies,215 this reckless spending,
this constant embezzlement, there would never be any deficit in the national budget
forcing us to bow in submission before America and Britain and request aid or a loan
from them. Our country has become needy on account of this reckless spending, this
endless embezzlement, for are we lacking in oil? Do we have no minerals, no natural
resources? We have everything, but this parasitism, this embezzlement, this
profligacy—all at the expense of the people and the public treasury—have reduced us
to a wretched state. Otherwise he [the Shāh] would not need to go all the way to
America and bow down before that ruffian’s desk, begging for help.
        In addition, superfluous bureaucracies and the system of file-keeping and
paper-shuffling that is enforced in them, all of which are totally alien to Islam, impose
further expenditures on our national budget not less in quantity than the illicit
expenditures of the first category. This administrative system has nothing to do with
Islam. These superfluous formalities, which cause our people nothing but expense,
trouble, and delay, have no place in Islam. For example, the method established by
Islam for enforcing people’s rights, adjudicating disputes, and executing judgments is
at once simple, practical, and swift. When the juridical methods of Islam were
applied, the sharī‘ah judge in each town, assisted only by two bailiffs and with only a
pen and inkpot at his disposal, would swiftly resolve disputes among people and send
them about their business. But now the bureaucratic organization of the Ministry of
Justice has attained unimaginable proportions, and is, in addition, quite incapable of
producing results.
        It is things like these that make our country needy and produce nothing but
expense and delay.
        The qualifications essential for the ruler drive directly from the nature and
form of Islamic government. In addition to general qualifications like intelligence and
administrative ability, there are two other essential qualifications: knowledge of the
law and justice.216
        After the death of the Prophet (s), difference arose concerning the identity of
the person who was to succeed him, but all the Muslims were in agreement that his
successor should be someone knowledgeable and accomplished; there was
disagreement only about his identity.
        Since Islamic government is a government of law, knowledge of the law is
necessary for the ruler, as has been laid down in tradition. Indeed such knowledge is
necessary not only for the ruler, but also for anyone holding a post or exercising some

214
    After the Revolution, extensive evidence came to light of misappropriation of the religious
endowment. Land was being given to cabaret singers and members of the royal family by the state-
controlled administration of the endowments. See the articles on this subject in the Tehran daily
Kayhān, Isfand 27, 1357/March 18, 1979. Concerning attempts by the regime to build a cinema in
Qum, see S.H.R., Barrasī va Tahlīlī az Nihzat-i Imām Khumaynī (Najaf? 1356 Sh./1977), pp. 103-104.
215
    A reference to the coronation ceremonies of 1967.
216
    Concerning the precise meaning of “justice,” see n. 21 above.


31                                                                         Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
government function. The ruler, however, must surpass all others in knowledge. In
laying claim to the Imamate, our Imāms also argued that the ruler must be more
learned than everyone else.57a The objections raised by the Shī‘i ‘ulamā are also to the
same effect. A certain person asked the caliph a point of law and he was unable to
answer; he was therefore unfit for the position of leader and successor to the Prophet
(s). Or again, a certain act he performed was contrary to the laws of Islam; hence he
was unworthy for his high post.217
        Knowledge of the law and justice, then, constitute fundamental qualifications
in the view of the Muslims. Other matters have no importance or relevance in this
connection. Knowledge of the nature of the angels, for example, or of the attributes of
the Creator, Exalted and Almighty, is of no relevance to the question of leadership. In
the same vein, one who knows all the natural sciences, uncovers all the secrets of
nature, or has a good knowledge of music, does not thereby qualify for leadership or
acquire any priority in the matter of exercising government over those who know the
laws of Islam and are just. The sole matters relevant to rule, those that were
mentioned and discussed in the time of the Most Noble Messenger (s), and our Imāms
(‘a), and were, in addition, unanimously accepted by the Muslims, are: (1) the
knowledgeability of the ruler or caliph, i.e., his knowledge of the provisions and
ordinances of Islam; and (2) his justice, i.e., his excellence in belief and morals.
        Reason also dictates the necessity for these qualities, because Islamic
government is a government of law, not the arbitrary rule of an individual over the
people or the domination of a group of individuals over the whole people. If the ruler
is unacquainted with the contents of the law, he is not fit to rule; for if he follows the
legal pronouncements of others his power to govern will be impaired, but if, on the
other hand, he does not follow such guidance, he will be unable to rule correctly and
implement the laws of Islam. It is an established principle that “the faqīh has authority
over the ruler.”58a If the ruler adheres to Islam, he must necessarily submit to the
faqīh, asking him about the laws and ordinances of Islam in order to implement them.
This being the case, the true rulers are the fuqahā218 themselves, and rulership ought
officially to be theirs, to apply to them, not to those who are obliged to follow the
guidance of the fuqahā on account of their own ignorance of the law.
        Of course, it is not necessary for all officials, provincial governors, and
administrators to know all the laws of Islam and be fuqahā; it is enough that they
should know the laws pertaining to their functions and duties. Such was the case in
the time of the Prophet (s), and the Commander of the Faithful (‘a). The highest
authority must possess the two qualities mentioned—comprehensive knowledge and
justice—but his assistants, officials and those sent to the provinces need know only
the laws relevant to their own tasks; on other matters they must consult the ruler.
        The ruler must also possess excellence in morals and belief; he must be just
and untainted by major sins. Anyone who wishes to enact the penalties provided by
Islam (i.e., to implement the penal code), to supervise the public treasury and the
income and expenditures of the state, and to have God assign to him the power to
57a
    Imām ‘Ali (‘a) said: “O men! The most qualified among men for the caliphate is he who is most
capable and knowledgeable of Allah’s commands.” Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 172. See Al-Ihtijāj, vol.
1, p. 229; Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 25, “Kitāb al-Imāmah,” “Bāb Jamī‘ fī Sifāt al-Imām,” p. 116. [Pub.]
217
    The reference here is to certain shortcomings Shī‘ah traditionally perceived in the exercise of rule
by Abū Bakr. See ‘Allāmah Hilli, Kashf al-Murād fī Sharh Tajrīd al-I’tiqād, ‘Destination’ (Maqsad) 5,
‘Issue’ (Mas’alah) 6. [Pub.]
58a
    Imām Ja‘far as-Sādiq (‘a) said: “The king is sovereign over the people while the scholar is the
authority over the king.” Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 1, “Kitāb al-‘Ilm,” sec. 1, hadīth 92, p. 183. [Pub.]
218
    Fuqahā: the plural of faqīh (see n. 1 above).


32                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
administer the affairs of His creatures must not be a sinner. God says in the Qur’an:
“my vow does not embrace the wrongdoer” (2:124);219 therefore, He will not assign
such functions to an oppressor or sinner.
         If the ruler is not just in granting the Muslims their rights, he will not conduct
himself equitably in levying taxes and spending them correctly and in implementing
the penal code. It becomes possible then for his assistants, helpers, and confidants to
impose their will on society, diverting the public treasury to personal and frivolous
use.
         Thus, the view of the Shī‘ah concerning government and the nature of the
persons who should assume rule was clear from the time following the death of the
Prophet (s) down to the beginning of the Occultation.220 It is specified that the ruler
should be foremost in knowledge of the laws and ordinances of Islam, and just in their
implementation.
         Now that we are in the time of the Occultation of the Imām (‘a), it is still
necessary that the ordinances of Islam relating to government be preserved and
maintained, and that anarchy be prevented. Therefore, the establishment of
government is still a necessity.
         Reason also dictates that we establish a government in order to be able to ward
off aggression and to defend the honor of the Muslims in case of attack. The sharī‘ah,
for its part, instructs us to be constantly ready to defend ourselves against those who
wish to attack us. Government, with its judicial and executive organs, is also
necessary to prevent individuals from encroaching on each other’s rights. None of
these purposes can be fulfilled by themselves; it is necessary for a government to be
established. Since the establishment of a government and the administration of society
necessitate, in turn, a budget and taxation, the Sacred Legislator has specified the
nature of the budget and the taxes that are to be levied, such as kharāj, khums, zakāt,
and so forth.
         Now that no particular individual has been appointed by God, Exalted and
Almighty, to assume the function of government in the time of Occultation, what must
be done? Are we to abandon Islam? Do we no longer need it? Was Islam valid for
only two hundred years? Or is it that Islam has clarified our duties in other respects
but not with respect to government?
         Not to have an Islamic government means leaving our boundaries unguarded.
Can we afford to sit nonchalantly on our hands while our enemies do whatever they
want? Even if we do put our signatures to what they do as an endorsement, still are
failing to make an effective response. Is that the way it should be? Or is it rather that
government is necessary, and that the function of government that existed from the
beginning of Islam down to the time of the Twelfth Imām (‘a) is still enjoined upon us
by God after the Occultation even though He has appointed no particular individuals
to the function?
         The two qualities of knowledge of the law and justice are present in countless
fuqahā of the present age. If they come together, they could establish a government of
universal justice in the world.


219
    The words of God’s since they are Qur’anic, but in the context in which they appear, the speaker is
Abraham. After asking God that prophethood be vested in his progeny, Abraham excludes any of his
descendants who might be wrongdoers from exercising the prophetic function. For an elaborate
commentary on this verse (Q 2:124), see Mīr Ahmad ‘Ali, Text, Translation and Commentary of the
Holy Qur’an (Elmhurst, NY: Tahrike Tarsile Qur’an, Inc., 1988), pp. 146-154,
220
    Occultation: see n. 27 above.


33                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
         If a worthy individual possessing these two qualities arises and establishes a
government, he will posses the same authority as the Most Noble Messenger (‘a) in
the administration of society, and it will be the duty of all people to obey him.
         The idea that the governmental power of the Most Noble Messenger (s) were
greater than those of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), or that those of the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a) were greater than those of the faqīh, is false and
erroneous. Naturally, the virtues of the Most Noble Messenger (s) were greater than
those of the rest of mankind, and after him, the Commander of the Faithful was the
most virtuous person in the world. But superiority with respect to spiritual virtues
does not confer increased governmental powers. God has conferred upon government
in the present age the same powers and authority that were held by the Most Noble
Messenger and the Imāms (‘a), with respect to equipping and mobilizing armies,
appointing governors and officials, and levying taxes and expending them for the
welfare of the Muslims. Now, however, it is no longer a question of a particular
person; government devolves instead upon one who possesses the qualities of
knowledge and justice.
         When we say that after the Occultation, the just faqīh has the same authority
that the Most Noble Messenger and the Imāms (‘a) had, do not imagine that the status
of the faqīh is identical to that of the Imāms and the Prophet (‘a). For here we are not
speaking of status, but rather of function. By “authority” we mean government, the
administration of the country, and the implementation of the sacred laws of the
sharī‘ah. These constitute a serious, difficult duty but do not earn anyone
extraordinary status or raise him above the level of common humanity. In other
words, authority here has the meaning of government, administration, and execution
of law; contrary to what many people believe, it is not a privilege, but a grave
responsibility. The governance of the faqīh is a rational and extrinsic221 matter; it
exists only as a type of appointment, like the appointment of a guardian for a minor.
With respect to duty and position, there is indeed no difference between the guardian
of a nation and the guardian of a minor. It is as if the Imām were to appoint someone
to the guardianship of a minor, to the governorship of a province, or to some other
post. In cases like these, it is not reasonable that there would be a difference between
the Prophet and the Imāms (‘a), on the one hand, and the just faqīh, on the other.
         For example, one of the concerns that the faqīh must attend to is the
application of the penal provisions of Islam. Can there be any distinction in this
respect between the Most Noble Messenger (s), the Imāms, and the faqīh? Will the
faqīh inflict fewer lashes because his rank is lower? Now, the penalty for the
fornicator is one hundred lashes. If the Prophet (s) applies the penalty, is he to inflict
one hundred fifty lashes, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) one hundred, and, the
faqīh fifty? The ruler supervises the executive power and has the duty of
implementing God’s laws; it makes no difference if he is the Most Noble Messenger
(s), the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) or the representative or judge he appointed to
Basrah or Kūfah, or a faqīh in the present age.
         Another one of the concerns of the Most Noble Messenger (s) and the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a) was the levying of taxes—khums, zakāt, jizyah and
kharāj on taxable lands.62a Now when the Prophet (s) levied zakāt, how much did he

221
    The “governance” (vilāyat) of the faqīh is extrinsic (i‘tibārī) to his person; he exercises it only by
virtue of the acquired attribute of just faqīh.
62a
    Taxable lands: those acquired by the Muslims under the Prophet (s) or the Islamic ruler. These lands
belong to all Muslims and therefore non-sellable. The Islamic government leases them and their
accrued income is called kharāj.


34                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
levy? One-tenth in one place and one-twentieth elsewhere? And how did the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a) proceed when he became the ruler? And what now, if
one of us becomes the foremost faqīh of the age and is able to enforce his authority?
In these matters, can there be any difference in the authority of the Most Noble
Messenger (s), that of ‘Ali (‘a), and that of the faqīh? God Almighty appointed the
Prophet (s) in authority over all the Muslims; as long as he was alive, his authority
extended over even ‘Ali (‘a). Afterwards, the Imām (‘a) had authority over all the
Muslims, even his own successor as Imām (‘a); his commands relating to government
were valid for everyone, and he could appoint and dismiss judges and governors.
        The authority that the Prophet and the Imām (‘a) had in establishing a
government, executing laws, and administering affairs, exists also for the faqīh. But
the fuqahā do not have absolute authority in the sense of having authority over all
other fuqahā of their own time, being able to appoint or dismiss them. There is no
hierarchy ranking one faqīh higher than another or endowing one with more authority
than another.
        Now that this much has been demonstrated, it is necessary that the fuqahā
proceed, collectively or individually, to establish a government in order to implement
the laws of Islam and protect its territory. If this task falls within the capabilities of a
single person, he has personally incumbent upon him the duty to fulfill it; otherwise, it
is a duty that devolves upon the fuqahā as a whole. Even if it is impossible to fulfill
the task, the authority vested in the fuqahā is not voided, because it has been vested in
them by God. If they can, they must collect taxes, such as zakāt, khums, and kharāj,
spend them for the welfare of the Muslims, and also enact the penalties of the law.
The fact that we are presently unable to establish a complete and comprehensive form
of government does not mean that we should sit idle. Instead, we should perform, to
whatever extent we can, the tasks that are needed by the Muslims and that pertain to
the functions an Islamic government must assume.
        To prove that government and authority belong to the Imām (‘a) is not to
imply that the Imām (‘a) has no spiritual status. The Imām (‘a) does indeed possess
certain spiritual dimensions that are unconnected with their function as a ruler. The
spiritual status of the Imām (‘a) is a universal divine viceregency that is sometimes
mentioned by the Imāms (‘a). It is a viceregency pertaining to the whole of creation,
by virtue of which all the atoms in the universe humble themselves before the holder
of authority. It is one of the essential beliefs of our Shī‘i school that no one can attain
the spiritual status of the Imāms, not even the cherubim or the prophets.222 In fact,
according to the traditions that have been handed down to us, the Most Noble
Messenger and the Imāms (‘a) existed before the creation of the world in the form of
lights situated beneath the divine throne; they were superior to other men even in the



222
    The “governance” (vilāyat) of the Imāms is intrinsic to their persons, unlike that of the fuqahā;
moreover, its scope is not limited to men but embraces the whole of creation. They therefore exercise
“cosmic governance” (vilāyat-i takvīnī), in part through the performance of miracles. This form of
vilāyat is common to the Imāms and to the foremost of the prophets, who exercised a governmental
function while also propagating a divine message. The statement here that “no one can attain the
spiritual status of the Imāms, not even the cherubim or the prophets” thus carries the strict sense that
the Imāms are superior to those prophets whose mission lacked the dimension of governmental
leadership. Concerning the different types of vilāyat, see Murtazā Mutahhari, Valīhā va Vilāyat-hā
(Qum, 1355 Sh./1975), which was translated into English by Mustajab Ansāri under the title Master
and Mastership (Karachi: Islamic Seminary Publication, 1980) and by Yahyā Cooper as Wilāyat: The
Station of the Master (Tehran: World Organization for Islamic Services, 1982)


35                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
sperm from which they grow and in their physical composition.223 Their exalted
station is limited only by the divine will, as indicated by the saying of Jibrā’īl (‘a)
recorded in the traditions on the mi‘rāj: “Were I to draw closer by as much as the
breadth of a finger, surely I would burn.”224 The Prophet (s) himself said: “We have
states with God that are beyond the reach of the cherubim and the prophets.”225 It is a
part of our belief that the Imāms too enjoy similar states, before the question of
government even arises. For example, Fātimah (‘a) also possessed these states, even
though she was not a ruler, a judge, or a governor.226 These states are quite distinct
from the function of government. So when we say that Fātimah (‘a) was neither a
judge nor a ruler, this does not mean that she was like you and me, or that she has no
spiritual superiority over us. Similarly, if someone says, in accordance with the
Qur’an, that “The Prophet (s) has higher claims on the believers than their own
selves” (33:6), he has attributed to him something more exalted than his right to
govern the believers. We will not examine these matters further here, for they belong
to the area of another science.
         To assume the function of government does not in itself carry any particular
merit or status; rather, it is a means for fulfilling the duty of implementing the law and
establishing the Islamic order of justice. The Commander of the Faithful (‘a) said to
Ibn ‘Abbās67a concerning the nature of government and command: “How much is this
shoe worth?” Ibn ‘Abbās replied: “Nothing”. The Commander of Faithful (‘a) then
said: “Command over you is worth still less in my eyes, except for this: by means of
ruling and commanding you I may be able to establish the right”—i.e., the laws and
institutions of Islam—“and destroy the wrong”227—i.e., all impermissible and
oppressive laws and institutions.
         Rule and command, then, are in themselves only a means, and if this means is
not employed for the good and for attaining noble aims, it has no value in the eyes of
the men of God. Thus the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) says in his sermon in Nahj
al- Balāghah: “Were it not for the obligation imposed on me, forcing me to take up
this task of government, I would abandon it.”228 It is evident, then, that to assume the
function of government is to acquire a means, and not a spiritual station, for if
government were spiritual station, nobody would be able to either usurp it or abandon
it. Government and the exercise of command acquire value only when they become
223
    Concerning these attributes of the Imāms, see Henri Corbin, Histoire de la philosophie islamique
(Paris, 1964), pp. 74 ff; Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi, Imamate: Vicegerency of the Prophet, anno.
Sayyid Muhammad Akhtar Rizvi (Tehran: WOFIS, 1986); Sayyid Mujtabā Mūsāwi Lāri, Imamate and
Leadership, trans. Hamid Algar (Qum: Foundation for Cultural Propagation in the World); Sayyid
Muhammad Rizvi, Shī‘ism Imamate and Wilāyat (Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 2000). [Pub.]
224
    The archangel Jibrā’īl (Gabriel) accompanied the Most Noble Messenger on his mi‘rāj (ascension to
the divine presence), but being of lowlier station than the Messenger, he was unable to endure the
splendor of the divine presence. See Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 18, “bāb ithbāt al-mi‘rāj wa ma‘nāhu wa
kayfiyyatah,” p. 382. [Pub.]
225
    A well-known tradition relating to the mi‘rāj.
226
    Fātimah, the daughter of the Prophet, shared in the exalted states of the Prophet and the Twelve
Imāms in that she possessed the same quality of ‘ismat (divinely bestowed freedom from error and sin)
that they did. As daughter of the Prophet and wife of the first Imām, she served, moreover, as a link
between the Prophet and his successors. See Ibrāhīm Amīni and Sayyid Kāzim Qazvīni, Fatima the
Gracious, trans. Abū Muhammad Ordoni (Qum: Ansariyan Publications) [Pub.]
67a
    Ibn ‘Abbās: more fully, ‘Abdullāh ibn ‘Abbās ibn ‘Abdul Muttalib (3 B.H.-68 A.H.) was a cousin of
the Prophet and ‘Ali, who learned the science of Qur’anic exegesis from the latter and known as “chief
of the exegetes” and “scholar of the community”. He had been one of Imām ‘Ali’s commanders in the
Battles of Jamal, Siffīn and Nahrawan. [Pub.]
227
    Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 33, p. 76. [Pub.]
228
    Nahj al-Balāghah, p. 50.


36                                                                            Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
the means for implementing the law of Islam and establishing the just Islamic order;
then the person in charge of government may also earn some additional virtue and
merit.
        Some people, whose eyes have been dazzled by the things of this world,
imagine that leadership and government represented in themselves dignity and high
station for the Imāms, so that if others come to exercise power, the world will
collapse. Now the Soviet ruler, the British Prime Minister, and the American
President all exercise power, and they are all unbelievers. They are unbelievers, but
they have political power and influence, which they use to execute anti-human laws
and policies for the sake of their own interests.
        It is the duty of the Imāms and the just fuqahā to use government institutions
to execute divine law, to establish the just Islamic system, and serve mankind.
Government in itself represents nothing but pain and trouble for them, but what are
they to do? They have been given a duty, a mission to fulfill; the governance of the
faqīh is nothing but the performance of a duty.
        When explaining why he assumed the tasks of government and rule, the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a) declared that he did so for the sake of certain exalted
aims, namely the establishment of justice and the abolition of injustice. He said, in
effect: “O God, You know that it is not our purpose to acquire position and power, but
rather to deliver the oppressed from the hands of the unjust. What impelled me to
accept the task of command and rule over the people was this: God, Almighty and
Exalted, has exacted a pledge from the scholars of religion and assigned the duty of
not remaining silent in the face of the gluttony and self-indulgence of the unjust and
the oppressor on the one hand, and the wasting hunger of the oppressed, on the
other.”69a He also said: “O God! You know well that the struggle we have waged has
not been for the sake of winning political power, nor for seeking worldly goods and
overflowing wealth.” He went directly on to explain the goal for the sake of which he
and his companions had been struggling and exerting themselves: “Rather it was our
aim to restore and implement the luminous principles of Your religion and to reform
the conduct of affairs in Your land, so that Your downtrodden servants might gain
security and Your laws, which have remained unfulfilled and in abeyance, might be
established and executed.”229
        The ruler who, by means of the organs of government and the power of
command that are at his disposal, desires to attain the exalted aims of Islam, the same
aims set forth by the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), must possess the essential
qualities to which we have already referred; that is, he must know the law and be just.
The Commander of the Faithful (‘a) mentions next the qualities essential in a ruler
immediately after he has specified the aims of government: “O God! I was the first
person that turned toward You by accepting Your religion as soon as I heard your
Messenger (s) declare it. No one preceded me in prayer except the Messenger (s)
himself. And you, O people! You know well that it is not fitting that one who is
greedy and parsimonious should attain rule and authority over the honor, lives, and
income of the Muslims, and the laws and ordinances enforced among them, and also
leadership of them.
        “Furthermore, he should not be ignorant and unaware of the law, lest in his
ignorance he mislead the people. He must not be unjust and harsh, causing the people
to cease all traffic and dealing with him because of his oppressiveness. Nor must he

69a
      Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 3 (Shaqshaqiyyah Sermon). [Pub.]
229
      Nahj al-Balāghah, pp. 188-189.


37                                                                Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
fear states, so that he seeks the friendship of some and treats others with enmity. He
must refrain from accepting bribes when he sits in judgment, so that the rights of men
are trampled underfoot and the claimant does not receive his due. He must not leave
the practice of the Prophet (s) and law in abeyance, so that the community falls into
misguidance and peril.”230
         Notice how this discourse revolves around two points, knowledge and justice,
and how the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) regards them as necessary qualities of the
ruler. In the expression: “He should not be ignorant and unaware of the law, lest in his
ignorance he mislead the people,” the emphasis is upon knowledge, while in the
remaining sentences the emphasis is upon justice, in its true sense. The true sense of
justice is that the ruler should conduct himself like the Commander of the Faithful (‘a)
in his dealings with other states, in his relations and transactions with the people, in
passing sentence and giving judgment, and in distributing the public income. To put it
differently, the ruler should adhere to the program of rule that the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) assigned to Mālik Ashtar231—in reality, to all rulers and governors, for it
is something like a circular addressed to all who exercise rule. If the fuqahā become
rulers, they too should consider it as their set of instructions.
         Here is a narration totally without ambiguity. The Commander of the Faithful
(‘a) relates that the Most Noble Messenger (s) said: “O God! Have mercy on those
that succeed me.” He repeated this thrice and was then asked: “O Messenger of God,
who are those that succeed you?” He replied: “They are those that come after me,
transmit my traditions and practice, and teach them to the people after me.”
         Shaykh Sadūq232 (may God’s mercy be upon him) has related this narration
with five chains of transmission (actually four, since two of them are similar in certain
respects) in the following books: Jamī‘ al-Akhbār, ‘Uyūn Akhbār ar-Ridhā, and Al-
Majālis.233
         Among the cases where this tradition has been designated as musnad,234 in one
instance we find the words “and teach them,” and in other instances we find, “and
teach them to the people.” Whenever the tradition is designated as mursal,235 we find
only the beginning of the sentence, with the phrase “and teach them to the people after
me” completely omitted.
         We can make either of two assumptions with respect to this tradition. First, it
is the only instance of the tradition, and the phrase beginning “and teach them” either

230
    Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 131 on p. 31 of the present volume. [Pub.]
231
    Mālik Ashtar: more fully, Mālik ibn Hārith from Nakha’a and famous as al-Ashtar, was among the
prominent commanders of Imām ‘Ali’s army and the governor appointed to Egypt by Imām ‘Ali. He
accompanied the Imām in the Battles of Jamal and Siffīn. On his way to Egypt, he was killed through
the conspiracy of Mu‘āwiyah. For the text of the Imām’s famous instructions to him before setting
forth to Egypt, see Nahj al-Balāghah, Letter 53, pp. 426-445. A complete translation is contained in
William C. Chittick, A Shī‘ite Anthology (Albany, N.Y., 1980), pp. 68-82. [Pub.]
232
    Shaykh Sadūq: also known as Ibn Babūyah, one of the most important of the early Shī‘i scholars.
He died in 381/991. For his short biography and works, see the introduction of Shaykh as-Sadūq,
I’tiqādātu ’l-Imāmiyyah: A Shī‘ite Creed, 3rd Ed., trans. Asaf A. A. Fyzee (Tehran: World Organization
for Islamic Services, 1999), pp. 6-23. [Pub.]
233
    Jamī‘ al-Akhbār: a collection of Shī‘I traditions. ‘Uyūn Akhbār ar-Ridhā: a collection of traditions
relating to Imām Ridā, compiled by Shaykh Sadūq for Sāhib ibn ‘Abbād, celebrated minister of the
Buwayhid dynasty and patron of learning. Al-Majālis: also known as al-Amali, the record of a series of
discourses given by Shaykh Sadūq concerning all aspects of Shī‘i Islam.
234
    Musnad: a hadīth that goes back to the Prophet by an unbroken chain of transmission.
235
    Mursal: a hadīth whose chain of transmission goes only as far back as a “follower” (member of the
second generation of Islam) who does not mention the name of the companion of the Prophet from
whom he heard it.


38                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
was later added to the end, or was indeed a part of the tradition but was later omitted
in certain versions. The second alternative is more probable. For if the phrase were
added, we could not say that it was as the result of mistake or error, given that the
tradition was handed down by several chain of transmission and the respective
narrators lived at great distances from each other—one in Balkh, another in Nishābūr,
and still another elsewhere. Nor is it possible that this phrase was deliberately added;
it is highly unlikely that it would have occurred to each of several people living far
apart from each other to add such a sentence to the tradition. Therefore, if it is a single
narration, we can assert with certainly that either the phrase beginning, “and teach
them” was omitted from one of the versions recorded by Shaykh Sadūq (or
overlooked by the copyists who wrote down his work), or Shaykh Sadūq himself
failed to mention it for some other reason.
         The second assumption would be that there are two separate traditions; one
without the phrase “and teach them…” and the other with it. If the phrase is part of
the tradition, it certainly does not apply to those whose task is simply the narration of
tradition and who are not competent to express an independent juridical opinion or
judgment. There are certain scholars of tradition who do not understand hadīth at all;
as implied in the saying: ”Many a scholar of law falls short of being a faqīh,” they are
merely a vehicle for the recording, collecting and writing down of traditions and
narrations and for placing them at the disposal of the people. It cannot be said of such
scholars that they are the successors of the Prophet, teaching the sciences of Islam.236
Their efforts on behalf of Islam and the Muslims are of course most valuable, and
many scholars of tradition have indeed also been fuqahā, competent to express an
independent opinion; e.g., Kulayni,237 Shaykh Sadūq,238 and his father (God’s mercy
on all of them). These three were fuqahā, and they taught the ordinances and sciences
of Islam to the people. When we say that Shaykh Sadūq differed from Shaykh
Mufīd,239 we do not mean that Shaykh Sadūq was unlearned in fiqh,240 or that he was
less learned than Shaykh Mufīd. Shaykh Sadūq was, after all, the person who
elucidated all the principles and secondaries of religion in a single sitting. He differed
from Shaykh Mufīd and others like him in that they were mujtahids who brought their
own reasoning to bear on traditions and narrations, while Shaykh Sadūq was a faqīh
who did not have recourse to his own reasoning, or did so only rarely.
         The phrase we are discussing applies to those who expound the sciences of
Islam, who expound the ordinances of Islam, and who educate the people in Islam,
preparing them to instruct others in turn. In the same way, the Most Noble Messenger
(s), and the Imāms (‘a) proclaimed and expounded the ordinances of Islam; they had
teaching circles where they gave the benefit of their learning to several thousand

236
    That is, there is a functional distinction between the scholar of hadīth and the faqīh, although it is
possible for a single individual to embody the two functions.
237
    Kulayni: see n. 30 above.
238
    Shaykh Sadūq: see n. 73 above.
239
    Shaykh Mufīd: the common designation of Abū ‘Abdullāh Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Nu‘mān
al-Hārithi (d. 413/1022) who was a great Shī‘ah jurist, traditionist and scholar of scholasticism. Notable
among his disciples were Sayyid Murtadā ‘Allama al-Hudā, Sayyid Rāzi, Shaykh Tūsi, and Najashi.
Aroung 200 works are attributed to him, from which we can cite Kitāb al-Irshad, Ikhtisās, Awā’il al-
Maqālāt, ‘Amali, and Maqna‘ah. See Shaykh Mufīd, Kitāb al-Irshād: The Book of Guidance into the
Lives of the Twelve Imāms, trans. I.K.A. Howard (Karachi: Islamic Seminary Publications),
introduction, pp. xxi-xxvii; Martin J. McDermott, The Theology of al-Shaikh al-Mufīd (Beirut: Dar al-
Mashreq, 1978), introduction, pp. 8-45. [Pub.]
240
    Fiqh: jurisprudence; the discipline devoted to the study of the principles and ordinances of Islamic
law.


39                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
people, whose duty it was, in turn, to teach others. That is the meaning implied in the
phrase “and teach the people…”: disseminating the knowledge of Islam among the
people and conveying to them the ordinances of Islam. If we believe that Islam is for
all the people in the world, it becomes obvious to every rational mind that the
Muslims, and particularly the scholars among them, have the duty of disseminating
knowledge of Islam and its ordinances and acquainting the people of the world with
them.
        If we suppose that the phrase “and teach them to the people” does not belong
to the end of the hadīth, then we must see what the Prophet (s) might have meant in
his saying: “O God! Have mercy on those that succeed me: those that come after me
and transmit my traditions and practice.” The tradition, even in this form, still would
not apply to those who merely relate traditions without being fuqahā. For the divine
practices and norms constituting the totality of the ordinances of Islam are known as
the practice of the Prophet (s) by virtue of the fact that they were revealed to him. So
anyone who wishes to disseminate the practices of the Most Noble Messenger (s)
must know all the ordinances of God; he must be able to distinguish the authentic
from the false, those of absolute from those of limited application, and the general
from the specific. Further, he must be able to discern rational categories, distinguish
between traditions originating in circumstances of taqiyyah241 and those originating
otherwise, and be fully conversant with all the necessary criteria that have been
specified. Traditionists who have not attained the level of ijtihād242 and who merely
transmit hadith know nothing about all this; hence, they are incapable of discerning
the true practice of the Messenger of God (s). Mere transmission could have no value
in the eyes of the Messenger, and it was certainly not his desire that phrases like: “The
Messenger of God said,” or “It is related on the authority of the Messenger of God”
should gain currency among the people, if the sentences prefaced by these phrases
were counterfeited and not his. What he desired instead was that his true practice
should be disseminated among the people and the real ordinances of Islam spread
among them. The tradition: “Whoever preserves for my people forty traditions will be
resurrected by God as a faqīh”243 and similar traditions praising the dissemination of
hadith do not pertain to traditionists who have no concept of the nature of tradition.
They pertain to those who are able to distinguish the true narration of the Most Noble
Messenger (s) in accordance with the true ordinances of Islam. Such persons are none
other than the mujtahids and the fuqahā; they are the ones able to assess all different
aspects and implications of a ruling, and to deduce the true ordinances of Islam on the
basis of the criteria they have inherited from the Imāms (‘a). They are the successors
of the Most Noble Messenger (s), disseminating the divine ordinances and instructing
men in the sciences of Islam. It is for them that the Prophet (s) prayed when he said,
“O God! Have mercy on my successors.”
        There is no doubt, therefore, that the tradition: “O God! Have mercy on my
successors” does not relate to the transmitters of tradition who are mere scribes; a
scribe cannot be a successor to the Prophet (s). The successors are the fuqahā of
Islam. Dissemination of the ordinances of Islam, as well as the teaching and
instruction of the people, is the duty of fuqahā who are just. For if they are not just,
they will be like those who forged traditions harmful to Islam, like Samūrah ibn


241
    Taqiyyah: see n. 16 above.
242
    Ijtihād: see n. 4 above.
243
    A well-known tradition that has led to the compilation of anthologies of forty hadīth intended for
memorization by those who wish to attain the promised reward.


40                                                                            Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
Jundab,244 who forged traditions hostile to the Commander of the Faithful (‘a). And if
they are not fuqahā, they cannot comprehend the nature of fiqh and the ordinances of
Islam, and they may disseminate thousands of traditions in praise of kings that have
been forged by the agents of the oppressors and pseudo-scholars attached to royal
courts. It is easy to see what results they obtained on the basis of the two weak
traditions that they set up against the Qur’an, with its insistent commands to rise up
against kings and its injunctions to Moses to rebel against the Pharaoh.245 Quite apart
from the Glorious Qur’an, there are numerous traditions exhorting men to struggle
against tyrants and those who pervert religion.246 Lazy people among us have laid
these aside and, relying on these two weak hadīths that may well have been forged by
court preachers, tell us we must make peace with kings and give our allegiance to the
court. If they were truly acquainted with tradition and knowledgeable about religion,
they would act instead in accordance with the numerous traditions that denounce the
oppressors. If it happens that they are acquainted with tradition, then we must
conclude that, they do not have the quality of justice. For, not being just and failing to
eschew sin, they overlook the Qur’an and all the narration that condemn the
oppressor, and concentrate instead on those two weak hadith. It is the appetites of
their stomachs that cause them to cling to them, not knowledge. Appetite and
ambition make men subservient to royal courts; true tradition does not.
        In any event, the dissemination of the sciences of Islam and the proclamation
of its ordinances are the task of the just fuqahā—those who are able to distinguish the
true ordinances from the false, and the traditions of the Imāms (‘a) arising in
conditions of taqiyyah from those originating otherwise. For we know that our Imāms
were sometimes subjected to conditions that prevented them from pronouncing a true
ordinance; they were exposed to tyrannical and oppressive rulers who imposed
taqiyyah and fear upon them. Naturally, their fear was for religion not themselves, and
if they had not observed taqiyyah in certain circumstances, oppressive rulers would
have entirely rooted out true religion.
        There cannot be the least doubt that the tradition we have been discussing
refers to the governance of the faqih, for to be a successor means to succeed to all the
functions of prophethood. In this respect what is implied by the sentence: “O God!
Have mercy on my successors” is no less than what is implied by the sentence: “ ‘Ali
is my successor,” since the meaning of successorship is the same in both cases. The
phrase “who come after me and transmit my traditions” serves to designate the
successors, not to define succession, for succession was a well-known concept in the
first age of Islam and did not require elucidation. Moreover, the person who asked the
Prophet (s), whom he meant by his successors was not enquiring after the meaning of
successorship; he was requesting the Prophet (s) to specify those whom he meant, as
he indeed did in his reply. It is remarkable that nobody has taken the phrase: “ ‘Ali is

244
    Samūrah ibn Jundab: more fully, Abū Sa‘īd Samūrah ibn Jundab al-Qazāri, a companion of the
Prophet who accompanied him in numerous battles. He later settled in Basrah, where he temporarily
acted as governor on a number of occasions during the rule of Mu‘āwiyah, first Umayyad caliph.
245
    One of the two weak traditions referred to here is probably: “The sultan is the shadow of God upon
earth; whoever respects him, respects God, and whoever affronts him, affronts God.” For a critique of
this alleged tradition, see Nāsir ad-Dīn al-Albāni, Silsilat al-Āhādīth ad-Da‘īfa wa’l-Maudū‘a
(Damascus, 1384/ 1964), I, i, 98. The other weak tradition may be that says: ‘Whoever wishes long life
for a king will be resurrected together with him’. See Islam and Revolution, p. 220.
246
    For example, there is a tradition that says: “A word of truth spoken in the presence of an unjust ruler
is a meritorious form of jihād,” and two others close with the phrase “there is no obeying the one who
disobeys God.” For these and similar traditions, see ‘Abdullāh Fahd an-Nafīsi, ‘Indamā yahkum al-
Islām (London, n.d.), pp. 142-146.


41                                                                                Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
my successor,” or “the Imāms are my successors,” as referring to the simple task of
issuing juridical opinions; instead they derive the tasks of successorship and
government from them, whereas they hesitated to draw the same conclusion from the
words “my successors” in the tradition under consideration. This is solely because
they have imagined that succession to the position of the Most Noble Messenger (s)
has been limited or restricted to certain people, and that since each of the Imāms was a
successor, the religious scholars cannot act as successors, rulers, and governors. The
result is that Islam must be without any leader to care for it, the ordinances of Islam
must be in abeyance, the frontiers of Islam must be at the mercy of the enemies of
religion, and various kinds of perversion that have nothing to do with Islam are
gaining currency.
        Muhammad ibn Yahyā relates, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad,
who heard it from Ibn Mahbūb, who was informed of it by ‘Ali ibn Abi Hamzah, that
the Imām Abu ‘l-Hasan, son of Ja‘far,247 (‘a) said: “whenever a believer dies, the
angels weep, together with the ground where he engaged in the worship of God and
the gates of heaven that he would enter by means of his good deeds. A crack will
appear in the fortress of Islam, that naught can repair, for believers who are fuqahā are
the fortresses of Islam, like the encircling walls that protect a city.”248
        In the same chapter of Al-Kāfi, is another version of this tradition, which
reads: “Whenever a believer who is a faqih…” instead of “Whenever a believer…” In
contrast, at the beginning of the version we have cited, the expression “who is a faqih”
is missing. Later in the second version, however, when the cause for the angels’
weeping is adduced, the expression “believers who are fuqahā” does occur. This
makes it clear that the word faqih was omitted at the beginning of the tradition,
particularly since the concepts “fortress of Islam” and “encircling walls” and the like
are fully appropriate to the faqih.
        The saying of the Imām (‘a) that “believers who are fuqaha are the fortresses
of Islam” actually ascribes to the fuqahā the duty of being guardians of the beliefs,
ordinances, and institutions of Islam. It is clear that these words of the Imām (‘a) are
not an expression of ceremonial courtesy, like the words we sometimes exchange with
each other (I call you “Support of the Sharī‘ah,” and you bestow the same title on me
in return!). Nor do they have any similarity to the titles we use in addressing a letter to
someone: “His Noble Excellency, the Proof of Islam.”
        If a faqīh sits in the corner of his dwelling and does not intervene in any of the
affairs of society, neither preserving the laws of Islam and disseminating its
ordinances, nor in any way participating in the affairs of the Muslims or having any
care for them, can he be called “the fortress of Islam” or the protector of Islam?
        If the leader of a government tells an official or a commander, “Go and guard
such-and–such an area,” will the duty of guarding that he has assumed permit him to
go home and sleep, allowing the enemy to come and ravage that area? Or should he,
on the contrary, strive to protect that area in whatever way he can?
        Now if you say that we are preserving at least some of the ordinances of Islam,
let me ask you this question. Are you implementing the penal law of Islam and the
sanctions it provides? You will have to answer no.
        So a crack has appeared in the protective wall surrounding Islam, despite your
supposedly being its guardians.

247
    Imām Abū ’l-Hasan Mūsā, son of Ja‘far: seventh of the Twelve Imāms, and generally known as
Imām Mūsā al-Kāzim. He was born in Medina in 128/744 and died in prison in Baghdad in 183/799.
248
    See Shaykh Abū Ja‘far al-Kulayni, al-Kāfi, Eng. trans. Sayyid Muhammad Hasan Rizvi (Tehran:
WOFIS, 1398/1978), I, ii, 94-95.


42                                                                       Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
         Then I ask you: Are you guarding the frontiers of Islam and the territorial
integrity of the Islamic homeland? To this, your answer may be: “No, our task is only
to pray!”
         This means that a piece of the wall has collapsed.
         Now I ask you: Are you taking from the rich what they owe the poor and
passing it on to them? For that is your Islamic duty, to take from the rich and give to
the poor. Your answer may be, in effect: “No, this is none of our concern! God
willing, others will come and perform this task.”
         Then another part of the wall will have collapsed, and your situation will be
like that of Shāh Sultān Husayn waiting for the fall of Isfahan.249
         What kind of fortress is this? Each of the corners is occupied by some “pillar
of Islam,” but all he can do is offer excuses when put to the test. Is that what we mean
by “fortress”?
         The meaning of the statement of the Imām (‘a) that the fuqahā are the
fortresses of Islam is that they have a duty to protect Islam and that they must do
whatever is necessary to fulfill that duty. It is one of the most important duties and,
moreover, an absolute duty, not a conditional one. It is an issue to which the fuqahā of
Islam must pay particular attention. The religious teaching institution must give due
thought to the matter and equip itself with the means and strength necessary to protect
Islam in the fullest possible sense, just as the Most Noble Messenger (s) and the
Imāms (‘a) were the guardians of Islam, protecting its beliefs, ordinances and
institutions in the most comprehensive manner.
         We have abandoned almost all aspects of our duty, restricting ourselves to
passing on, from one generation to the next; certain parts of Islamic law and
discussing them among ourselves. Many of the ordinances of Islam have virtually
become part of the occult sciences, and Islam itself has become a stranger;250 only its
name has survived.
         All the penal provisions of Islam, which represent the best penal code ever
devised for humanity, have been completely forgotten; nothing but their name has
survived. As for the Qur’anic verses stipulating penalties and sanctions, “Nothing
remains of them but their recitation.”251 For example, we recite the verse: “Administer
to the adulterer and the adulteress a hundred lashes each”(24:2), but we do not know
what to do when confronted with a case of adultery. We merely recite the verse in
order to improve the quality of our recitation and to give each sound its full value. The
actual situation prevailing in our society, the present state of the Islamic community,
the prevalence of lewdness and corruption, the protection and support extended by our
governments to adultery—none of this concern us! It is enough that we understand
what penalties have been provided for the adulterer and adulteress without attempting
to secure their implementation or otherwise struggling against the existence of
adultery in our society!
         I ask you, is that the way the Most Noble Messenger (s) conduct himself? Did
he content himself with reciting the Qur’an, then lay it aside and neglect to ensure the

249
    Shāh Sultān Husayn was the last monarch of the Safavid dynasty, which ruled over Iran from the
beginning of the sixteenth century until the second decade of the eighteenth. Among the least
competent of the Safavid rulers, he devoted his energies to debauchery and failed to organize the
defense of his capital city, Isfahan, against Afghan invaders, to whom it fell in 1722 after a six-month
siege. See L. Lockhart, The Fall of the Safavid Dynasty (Cambridge, 1958), pp. 144-170.
250
    See n. 2 above.
251
    Part of a long hadīth concerning a dream in which the Messenger foresaw the misdeeds of the
Umayyads.


43                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
implementation of its penal provisions? Was it the practice of the successors of the
Prophet (s) to entrust matters to the people and tell them, “I have no further concern
with you”? Or, on the contrary, did they decree penalties for various classes of
offender—whippings, stonings, perpetual imprisonment, banishment? Examine the
sections of Islamic law relating to penal law and blood money: you will see that all of
these matters are part of Islam and part of the reason for the coming of Islam. Islam
came in order to establish order in society; leadership252 and government are for the
sake of ordering the affairs of society.
         It is our duty to preserve Islam. This duty is one of the most important
obligations incumbent upon us; it is more necessary even than prayer and fasting. It is
for the sake of fulfilling this duty that blood must sometimes be shed. There is no
blood more precious than that of Imām Husayn (‘a), yet it was shed for the sake of
Islam, because of the precious nature of Islam. We must understand this matter well
and convey it to others. You can be the true successors to the Prophet (s) as the
guardians of Islam only if you teach Islam to the people; do not say, “We will wait
until the coming of the Imām of the Age (‘a).” Would you consider postponing your
prayer until the coming of the Imām? The preservation of Islam is even more
important than prayer. Do not follow the logic of the governor of Khumayn253 who
used to say, “We must promote sin so that the Imām of the Age (‘a) will come. If sin
does not prevail, he will not manifest himself!”254 Do not sit here simply debating
among yourselves. Study all the ordinances of Islam and propagate all aspects of the
truth by writing and publishing pamphlets. It cannot fail to have an effect, as my own
experience testifies.
         ‘Ali relates, on the authority of his father, from an-Nawfali, who had it from
as-Sukūni, who was told it by Abu ‘Abdullāh (‘a), that the Most Noble Messenger (s)
said, “The fuqahā are the trustees of the prophets (‘a), as long as they do not concern
themselves with the illicit desires, pleasures, and wealth of the world.” The Prophet
(s) was then asked: “O Messenger of God! How may we know if they do so concern
themselves?” He replied: “By seeing whether they follow the ruling power. If they do
that, fear for your religion and shun them.”255 Examination of the whole of this hadith
would involve us in a lengthy discussion. We will speak only about the phrase: “The
fuqahā are the trustees of the prophets (‘a),” since it is what interests us here because
of its relevance to the topic of the governance of faqīh.
         First, we must see what duties, powers, and functions the prophets (‘a) had in
order to discover what the duties of the fuqahā, the trustees and successors of the
prophets (‘a), are in turn.
         In accordance with both wisdom and the essential nature of religion, the
purpose in sending the prophets (‘a) and the task of the prophets (‘a) cannot be simply
the delivery of judgments concerning a particular problem or the expounding of the
ordinances of religion. These judgments and ordinances were not revealed to the
Prophet (s) in order for him and the Imāms (‘a) to convey them truthfully to the
people as series of divinely appointed muftis,256 and then to pass this trust on in turn to
the fuqahā, so that they might likewise convey them to the people without any

252
    The expression translated here as “leadership” is imāmat-i i‘tibāri; see n. 62 above.
253
    Khumayn: the native town of Imām Khomeini.
254
    Since the Imām of the Age—i.e., the Twelfth Imām—will emerge from his occultation at the time
when injustice fills the earth, it has sometimes been thought that all positive action to remedy injustice
must be postponed until his coming.
255
    See Kulayni, al-Kāfi, I, ii, 188-119.
256
    Mufti: a scholar who pronounces an authoritative opinion (fatwā) on a point of law.


44                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
distortion. The meaning of the expression: “The fuqahā are the trustees of the
prophets (‘a)” is not that the fuqahā are the trustees simply with respect to the giving
of juridical opinions. For in fact the most important function of the prophets (‘a) is the
establishment of a just social system through the implementation of laws and
ordinances (which is naturally accompanied by the exposition and dissemination of
the divine teachings and beliefs). This emerges clearly from the following Qur’anic
verse: “Verily We have sent Our messengers with clear signs, and sent down with
them the Book and the Balance, in order that men might live in equity” (57:25). The
general purpose for the sending of prophets (‘a), then, is so that men’s lives may be
ordered and arranged on the basis of just social relations and true humanity may be
established among men. This is possible only by establishing government and
implementing laws, whether this is accomplished by the prophet himself, as was the
case with the Most Noble Messenger (s), or by the followers who come after him.
         God Almighty says concerning the khums: “Know that of whatever booty you
capture, a fifth belongs to God and His Messenger and to your kinsmen”(8:41).
Concerning zak           āt He says: “Levy a tax on their property”(9:103). There are
also other divine commands concerning other forms of taxation. Now the Most Noble
Messenger (s) had the duty not only of expounding these ordinances, but also of
implementing them; just as he was to proclaim them to the people, he was also to put
them into practice. He was to levy taxes, such as khums, zakāt and kharāj, and spend
the resulting income for the benefit of the Muslims; establish justice among peoples
and among the members of the community; implement the laws and protect the
frontiers and independence of the country; and prevent anyone from misusing or
embezzling the finances of the Islamic state.
         Now God Almighty appointed the Most Noble Messenger (s) head of the
community and made it a duty for men to obey him: “Obey God and obey the
Messenger and the holders of authority from among you” (4:59). The purpose for this
was not so that we would accept and conform to whatever judgment the Prophet (s)
delivered. Conformity to the ordinances of religion is obedience to God; all activities
that are conducted in accordance with divine ordinances, whether or not they are ritual
functions, are a form of obedience to God. Following the Most Noble Messenger (s),
then, is not conforming to divine ordinances; it is something else. Of course, obeying
the Most Noble Messenger (s) is, in a certain sense, obeying God; we obey the
Prophet (s) because God has commanded us to do so. But if, for example, the Prophet
(s), in his capacity as leader and guide of Islamic society, orders everybody to join the
army of Usāmah,257 so that no one has the right to hold back, it is the command of the
Prophet (s), not the command of God. God has entrusted to him the task of
government and command, and accordingly, in conformity with the interests of the
Muslims, he arranges for the equipping and mobilization of the army, and appoints or
dismisses governors and judges.
         This being the case, the principle: “The fuqahā are the trustees of the prophets
(‘a)” means that all of the tasks entrusted to the prophets (‘a) must also be fulfilled by
the just fuqahā as a matter of duty. Justice, it is true; is a more comprehensive concept
than trustworthiness and it is possible that someone may be trustworthy with respect
to financial affairs, but not just in a more general sense.258 However, those designated
in the principle: “The fuqahā are the trustees of the prophets (‘a)” are those who do
not fail to observe any ordinances of the law, and who are pure and unsullied, as is
257
    Usāmah: that is, Usāmah ibn Zayd, a beloved companion of the Prophet who was placed in charge
of a military expedition when he was only eighteen. He died in 59/679.
258
    See n. 21 above.


45                                                                        Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
implied by the conditional statement: “as long as they do not concern themselves with
the illicit desires, pleasures, and wealth of this world”---that is, as long as they do not
sink into the morass of worldly ambition. If a faqīh has as his aim the accumulation of
worldly wealth, he is longer just and cannot be the trustee of the Most Noble
Messenger (‘a) and the executor of the ordinances of Islam. It is only the just fuqahā
who may correctly implement the ordinances of Islam and firmly establish its
institutions, executing the penal provisions of Islamic law and preserving the
boundaries and territorial integrity of the Islamic homeland. In short, implementation
of all laws relating to government devolves upon the fuqahā: the collection of khums,
zakāt, sadaqah, jizyah, and kharāj and the expenditure of the money thus collected in
accordance with the public interest; the implementation of the penal provisions of the
law and the enactment of retribution (which must take place under the direct
supervision of the ruler, failing which the next-of-kin of the murdered person has no
authority to act); the guarding of the frontiers; and the securing of public order.
         Just as the Most Noble Messenger (s) was entrusted with the implementation
of divine ordinances and the establishment of the institutions of Islam, and just as God
Almighty set him up over the Muslims as their leader and ruler, making obedience to
him obligatory, so, too, the just fuqahā must be leaders and rulers, implementing
divine ordinances and establishing the institutions of Islam.
         Since Islamic government is a government of law, those acquainted with the
law, or more precisely, with religion—i.e., the fuqahā—must supervise its
functioning. It is they who supervise all executive and administrative affairs of the
country, together with all planning.
         The fuqahā are the trustees who implement the divine ordinances in levying
taxes, guarding the frontiers, and executing the penal provisions of the law. They must
not allow the laws of Islam to remain in abeyance, or their operation to be effected by
either defect or excess. If a faqīh wishes to punish an adulterer, he must give him one
hundred lashes in the presence of the people, in the exact manner that has been
specified. He does not have the right to inflict one additional lash, to curse the
offender, to slap him, or to imprison him for a single day. Similarly, when it comes to
the levying of taxes, he must act in accordance with the criteria and the laws of Islam;
he does not have the right to tax even a shāhi259 in excess of what the law provides.
He must not let disorder enter the affairs of the public treasury or even so much as a
shāhi be lost. If a faqīh acts in contradiction to the criteria of Islam (God forbid!), then
he will automatically be dismissed from his post, since he will have forfeited his
quality of trustee.
         Law is actually the ruler; the security for all is guaranteed by law, and law is
their refuge. Muslims and the people in general are free within the limits laid down by
the law; when they are acting in accordance with the provisions of the law, no one has
the right to tell them, “Sit here,” or “Go there.” An Islamic government does not
resemble states where the people are deprived of all security and everyone sits at
home trembling for fear of a sudden raid or attack by the agents of the state. It was
that way under Mu‘āwiyah260 and similar rulers: people had no security, and they
were killed or banished, or imprisoned for lengthy periods, on the strength of an
accusation or a mere suspicion, because the government was not Islamic. When an
Islamic government is established, all will live with complete security under the


259
   Shāhi: now obsolete, formerly the smallest unit of Iranian currency, worth one-twentieth of a rial.
260
   Mu‘āwiyah: first of the Umayyad caliphs and an adversary of Imām ‘Ali. He ruled from 41/661 to
60/680.


46                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
protection of the law, and no ruler will have the right to take any step contrary to the
provisions and laws of the immaculate sharī‘ah.
        The meaning of “trustee,” then, is that the fuqahā execute as a trust all the
affairs for which Islam has legislated—not that they simply offer legal judgments on
given questions. Was that the function of the Imām (‘a)? Did he merely expound the
law? Was it the function of the prophets (‘a) from whom the fuqahā have inherited it
as a trust? To offer judgment on a question of law or to expound the laws in general
is, of course, one of the dimensions of fiqh. But Islam regards law as a tool, not as an
end in itself. Law is a tool and an instrument for the establishment of justice in
society, a means for man’s intellectual and moral reform and his purification. Law
exists to be implemented for the sake of establishing a just society that will morally
and spiritually nourish refined human beings. The most significant duty of the
prophets (‘a) was the implementation of divine ordinances, and this necessarily
involved supervision and rule.
        There is a tradition of Imām Ridā (‘a) in which he says approximately the
following: “An upright, protecting, and trustworthy imām is necessary for the
community in order to preserve it from decline,” and then reasserts that the fuqahā are
the trustees of the prophets (‘a). Combining the two halves of the tradition, we reach
the conclusion that the fuqahā must be the leaders of the people in order to prevent
Islam from falling into decline and its ordinances from falling into abeyance.
        Indeed it is precisely because the just fuqahā have not had executive power in
the lands inhabited by Muslims and their governance has not been established that
Islam has declined and its ordinances have fallen into abeyance. The words of Imām
Ridā have fulfilled themselves; experience has demonstrated their truth.
        Has Islam not declined? Have the laws of Islam not fallen into disused in the
Islamic countries? The penal provisions of the law are not implemented; the
ordinances of Islam are not enforced; the institutions of Islam have disappeared;
chaos, anarchy, and confusion prevail—does not all this mean that Islam has
declined? Is Islam simply something to be written down in books like al-Kāfi261 and
then laid aside? If the ordinances of Islam are not applied and the penal provisions of
the law are not implemented in the external world—so that the thief, the plunderer,
the oppressor, and the embezzler all go unpunished while we content ourselves with
preserving the books of law, kissing them and laying them aside (even treating the
Qur’an this way), and reciting Yā-Sin on Thursday nights262—can say that Islam has
been preserved?
        Since many of us did not really believe that Islamic society must be
administered and ordered by an Islamic government matters have now reached such a
state that in the Muslim countries, not only does the Islamic order not obtain, with
corrupt and oppressive laws being implemented instead of the laws of Islam, but the
provisions of Islam appear archaic even to the ‘ulamā. So when the subject is raised,
they say that the tradition: “The fuqahā are trustees of the prophets” refers only to the
issuing of juridical opinions. Ignoring the verses of the Qur’an, they distort in the
same way all the numerous traditions that the scholars of Islam are to exercise rule
during the Occultation. But can trusteeship be in this manner? Is the trustee not
obliged to prevent the ordinances of Islam from falling into abeyance and criminals


261
    See n. 30 above.
262
    Yā-Sīn is the thirty-sixth chapter of the Qur’an. Its recitation is recommended as particularly
meritorious on certain occasions, among them Thursday night, because it leads into Friday, the best of
all days.


47                                                                            Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
from going unpunished? To prevent the revenue and income of the country from
being squandered, embezzled or misdirected?
         It is obvious that all of these tasks require the existence of trustees, and that it
is the duty of the fuqahā to assume the trust bequeathed to them, to fulfill it in a just
and trustworthy manner.
         The Commander of the Faithful (‘a) said to Shurayh263: “The seat [of judge]
you are occupying is filled by someone who is a prophet (‘a), the legatee of a prophet,
or else a sinful wretch.”264 Now since Shurayh was neither a prophet nor the legatee
of a prophet, it follows that he was a sinful wretch occupying the position of judge.
Shurayh was a person who occupied the position of judge in Kūfah for about fifty or
sixty years. Closely associated with the party of Mu‘āwiyah, Shurayh spoke and
issued fatwās265 in a sense favorable to him, and he ended up rising in revolt against
the Islamic state. The Commander of the Faithful (‘a) was unable to dismiss Shurayh
during his rule, because certain powerful figures protected him on the grounds that
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar had appointed him and that their action was not to be
controverted. Shurayh was thus imposed upon the Commander of the Faithful (‘a),
who did, however, succeed in ensuring that he abided by the law in his judgment.
         It is clear from the foregoing tradition that the position of judgment may be
exercised only by a prophet (‘a) or by the legatee of a prophet. No one would dispute
the fact that the function of judge belongs to the just fuqahā, in accordance with their
appointment by the Imāms (‘a). This unanimity contrasts with the questions of the
governance of the faqīh: some scholars, such as Narāqi,266 or among more recent
figures, Nā’ini,267 regard all of the extrinsic functions and tasks of the Imāms (‘a) as
devolving upon the faqih, while other scholars do not. But there can be no doubt that
the function of judging belongs to the just fuqahā; this is virtually self-evident.
         Considering the fact that the fuqahā do not have the rank of prophethood, and
they are indubitably not “wretched sinners,” we conclude that, in the light of the
tradition quoted above, they must be the legatees or successors of the Most Noble
Messenger (s). Since, however, the expression “legatee of a prophet” is generally
assumed to refer to his immediate successors, this tradition and others similar to it are
only rarely cited as evidence for the successorship of the fuqahā. The concept “legatee
of a prophet” is a broad one, however, and includes the fuqahā. The immediate
legatee of the Most Noble Messenger (s) was of course the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a), who was followed by the other Imāms (‘a), and the affairs of the people
were entrusted to them. But no one should imagine that the function of governing or
sitting in judgment was a form of privilege for the Imāms. Rule was entrusted to them
only because they were best able to establish a just government and implement social
263
    Shurayh: more fully, Abū Umayyah Shurayh ibn al-Hārith al-Kindi, judge of Kūfah appointed by
‘Umar. He retained this position under ‘Uthmān, ‘Ali, and the Umayyads and died a centenarian in
87/706. It is said that he sided with Ibn Ziyād and instigated the people against Imam Husayn in the
‘Āshūrā uprising. [Pub.]
264
    From Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah, a Shī‘i collection of traditions by Muhammad Hasan al-Hurr al-‘Āmili (d.
1104/1693).
265
    Fatwā: the plural of fatwā (an authoritative opinion on a point of law).
266
    Narāqi: that is, Hājj Mullāh Ahmad Narāqi, a scholar of importance in the early nineteenth century,
d. 1244/1829. He not only was a prolific author, but also clashed repeatedly with the monarch of his
day, Fath ‘Ali Shāh. See Hamid Algar, Religion and State in Iran, 1785-1906 (Berkeley, 1969), pp. 57,
89.
267
    Nā’ini: that is, Mīrzā Muhammad Husayn Nā’ini, an important scholar of the early twentieth
century, 1277/1860-1354/1936. Concerning his book on Shī‘i political theory, Tanbīh al-Ummah wa
Tanzīh al-Millah, see ‘Abdul-Hādi Hā’iri, Shi‘ism and Constitutionalism in Iran (Leiden, Netherlands,
1977), pp. 165-220.


48                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
justice among the people. The spiritual stations of the Imāms, which far transcend
human comprehension, had no connection with their naming and appointing officials.
If the Most Noble Messenger (s) had not appointed the Commander of the Faithful to
be his successor, he would still have possessed the same sublime spiritual qualities. It
is not that the exercise and function of government bestow spiritual rank and privilege
on a man; on the contrary, spiritual rank and privilege qualify a man for the
assumption of government and social responsibilities.
         In any event, we deduce from the tradition quoted above that the fuqahā are
the legatees, at one remove, of the Most Noble Messenger (s) and that all the tasks he
entrusted to the Imāms (‘a) are also incumbent on the fuqahā; all the tasks that
Messenger (s) performed, they too must perform, just as the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) did.
         There is another tradition that may serve as proof or support for our thesis, one
that is, indeed, preferable with respect to both its chain of transmission and its
meaning. One chain of transmission for it, that passing through Kulayni, is weak, but
the other, mentioned by Sadūq and passing through Sulaymān ibn Khālid108a is
authentic and reliable. This is the text of the tradition. Imām Ja‘far as-Sādiq268 (‘a)
said: “Refrain from judging, because judging is reserved for an imām who is
knowledgeable of the law and legal procedures and who behaves justly toward all the
Muslims; it is reserved for a prophet (‘a) or the legatee of a prophet.”
         Notice that the person who wishes to sit in judgment must, first of all, be an
imām. What is meant here by imām is the common lexical meaning of the word,
“leader” or “guide,” not its specific technical sense. In this context the Prophet (s)
himself counts as an imām. If the technical meaning of imām269 were intended, the
specification of the attributes of justice and knowledge in the tradition would be
superfluous. Second, the person who wishes to exercise the function of a judge must
possess the necessary knowledge. If he is an imām, but unlearned in matters of law
and juridical procedure, he does not have the right to be a judge. Third, he must be
just. The position of judge, then, is reserved for those who posses these three
qualifications—being a leader, and being knowledgeable and just. The tradition
proceeds to clarify that these three qualifications can be found only in a prophet (‘a)
or the trustee of a prophet.
         I stated earlier that the function of judge belongs exclusively to the just faqīh;
this is a fundamental aspect of fiqh, which is not a matter of dispute. Let us now see
whether the three-fold qualifications for exercising the function of judge are present in
the faqīh. Obviously we are concerned here only with the just faqīh, not with any
faqīh. The faqīh is, by definition, learned in matters pertaining to the function of
judge, since the term faqīh is applied to one who is learned not only in the laws and
judicial procedure of Islam, but also in the doctrines, institutions, and ethics of the
faith—the faqīh is, in short, a religious expert in the full sense of the word. If, in
addition, the faqīh is just, he will be found to have two of the necessary qualifications.
The third qualification is that he should be an imām, in the sense of leader. Now we

108a
     Sulaymān ibn Khālid: more fully, Sulaymān ibn Khālid ibn Dehqān ibn Nāfilah, was a reciter,
jurist, traditionist, and a trustee and confidant of Imāms al-Bāqir and as-Sāqid (‘a). [Pub.]
268
    Imām Ja‘far as-Sādiq: sixth of the Twelve Imāms, 83/702-140/757. Also referred to as Imām Sādiq,
he was particularly important for his role in developing the religious sciences. See Shaykh Mohammed
al-Husayn al-Muzaffar, Imām Al-Sādiq, trans. Jāsim al-Rasheed (Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 1998).
[Pub.]
269
    The technical sense of the word imām is that which it requires when applied to the Twelve Imāms,
who were not only successors to the Prophet but also endowed with lofty spiritual virtues.


49                                                                          Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
have already stated that the just faqīh occupies a position of guidance and leadership
with respect to judging, in accordance with his appointment by the Imām (‘a). Further,
the Imām has specified that the three necessary qualifications are not to be found in
anyone except a prophet (‘a) or the legatee of a prophet. Since the fuqahā are not
prophets (‘a) they must be legatees or successors of the prophets (‘a). Therefore, we
come to the conclusion that the faqīh is the legatee of the Most Noble Messenger (s),
and in addition, during the Occultation of the Imām (‘a), he is the leader of the
Muslims and the chief of the community. He alone may exercise the function of judge
and no one else has the right to occupy the position of judgeship.
         To whom should we recourse in social circumstances?
         The third tradition relates to a signed decree of the Imām from which certain
conclusions may be deduced, as I propose to do.
         It is related in the book Ikmāl ad-Dīn wa Itmām an-Ni‘mah270 that Ishāq ibn
Ya‘qūb wrote a letter to the Imām of the Age271 (may God hasten his renewed
manifestation) asking him for guidance in certain problems that had arisen, and
Muhammad ibn ‘Uthmān al-‘Umari,272 the deputy of the Imām (‘a), conveyed the
letter to him. A response was issued, written in the blessed hand of the Imam (‘a),
saying: “In case of newly occurring social circumstances, you should turn for
guidance to those who relate our traditions, for they are my proof to you, as I am
God’s proof.”
         What is meant here by the phrase “newly occurring social circumstances”
(hawādith-i wāqi‘ah) is not legal cases and ordinances. The writer of the letter did not
wish to ask what was to be done in the case of legal issues that were without
precedent. For the answer to that question would have been self-evident according to
the Shī‘i school, and unanimously accepted traditions specify that one should have
recourse to the fuqahā in such cases. Indeed people had recourse to the fuqahā and
made enquiries of them even during the lifetime of the Imāms (‘a). A person living in
the time of the Lesser Occultation and in communication with the four deputies of the
Imam (‘a), who wrote a letter to him and received an answer, must have known whom
to refer to for the solution of legal cases. What is meant by hawādith-i wāqi‘ah is
rather the newly arising situations and problems that affect the people and the
Muslims. The question Ishāq ibn Ya‘qūb was implicitly posing was this: “Now that
we no longer have access to you, what should we do with respect to social problems?
What is our duty?” Or, he may have mentioned certain specific events and then asked:
“To whom should we have recourse for guidance in these matters?” But it seems that
his question was general in intent and that the Imām (‘a) responded in
correspondingly general fashion, saying, “With respect to such occurrences and
problems, you should refer to those who narrate our traditions, i.e., the fuqahā. They
are my proofs to you, and I am God’s proof to you.”
         What is the meaning of “God’s proof”?273 What do you understand by this
term? Can a single tradition count as a proof? If Zurārah274 related a tradition, would


270
    Ikmāl ad-Dīn wa Itmām an-Ni‘mah: a work by Shaykh Sadūq on the occultation of the Imām.
271
    Imām of the Age: the Twelfth Imām. See n. 95 above.
272
    Muhammad ibn ‘Uthmān al-‘Umari: the second deputy of the Imām during the Lesser Occultation.
See n. 27 above.
273
     The designation hujjat (“proof”) given to the Imāms has a two-fold sense. First, through the
qualities they manifest, they are proofs of the existence of God and of the veracity of the religion He
has revealed. Second, they constitute proofs to be advanced on the Day of Judgment against those who
claim they were uninformed of God’s law. See ‘Abdul ‘Azīz ‘Abdulhussein Sachedina, Islamic
Messianism (Albany, N.Y., 1980), pp. 66-67.


50                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
that make him a proof? Is the Imām of the Age (‘a) comparable in authority to
Zurārah, whom we follow in the sense that we act upon a tradition of the Most Noble
Messenger (s) that Zurārah has narrated? When it is said that the holder of authority is
the proof of God, does it mean that he is a “proof” purely with respect to details of the
law, with the duty of giving legal opinions? The Most Noble Messenger (s) said: “I
am now departing, and the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) will be my proof to you.”
Do you deduce from this that after the Prophet (s) departed all tasks came to an end
except delivering legal opinions, and that this was all that was left for the Commander
of the Faithful (‘a)? Or on the contrary, does the term “proof of God” mean that just
as the Most Noble Messenger (s) was the proof and authoritative guide of all the
people, just as God had appointed him to guide people in matters, so too the fuqahā
are responsible for all affairs and are the authoritative guides of the people?
        A “proof of God” is one whom God has designated to conduct affairs; all his
deeds, actions, and sayings constitute a proof for the Muslims. If some one commits
an offense, reference will be to the “proof” for adducing evidence and formulating the
charge. If the “proof” commands you to perform a certain act, to implement the penal
provisions of the law in a certain way, or to spend the income derived from booty,
zakāt, and sadaqah275 in a certain manner, and you fail to obey him in any of these
respects, then God Almighty will advance a “proof” against you on the Day of
Judgment. If, despite the existence of the “proof,” you turn to oppressive authorities
for the solution of your affairs, again God Almighty will refer to the “proof” as an
argument against you on the Day of Judgment, saying: “I established a proof for you;
why did you turn instead to the oppressors and the judicial system of the
wrongdoers?” Similarly, God designates the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) as a
“proof” against those who disobeyed him and followed false paths. Again, against
those who assumed the caliphate, against Mu‘āwiyah and the Umayyad caliphs,
against the Abbasid caliphs, and those who acted in accordance with their desires, a
proof and argument is established: “Why did you illicitly assume rule over the
Muslims? Why did you usurp the caliphate and government, despite your
unworthiness?”
        God calls to account all oppressive rulers and all governments that act contrary
to the criteria of Islam, asking them: “Why did you commit oppression? Why did you
squander the property of the Muslims? Why did you organize millenary
celebrations?276 Why did you spend the wealth of the people on the coronation277 and
the abominable festivities that accompanied it?” If one of them should reply: “Given
the circumstances of the day, I was unable to act justly, or to relinquish my
pretentious, luxurious palaces; I had myself crowned to draw attention to my country
and the degree of progress we had achieved,” he will then be answered: “The
Commander of the Faithful (‘a) was also a ruler; he ruled over all the Muslims and the
whole of the broad Islamic realm. Were you more zealous than he in promoting the
glory of Islam, the Muslims and the lands of Islam? Was your realm more extensive

274
     Zurārah: more fully, ‘Abd Rabbih ibn A‘yan Shaybāni al-Kufi al-Zurārah, an authority on the
traditions of the fourth, fifth, and sixth Imāms, d. 150/767. Scholars of ‘ilm ar-rijāl (science of hadīth
transmitters’ biographies) have affirmed his reliability. He was known to have authored the books Al-
Istitā‘ah and Al-Jabr. [Pub.]
275
    Sadaqah: voluntary payments collected by the Muslim state to be spent for purposes of charity.
276
    The Shāh organized his vulgar and criminally extravagant celebration of two-and-a-half millennia of
monarchical rule in October 1971, some two years after these lectures were given in Najaf.
Preparations for the event, however, were begun in the late 1960’s. See also Islam and Revolution, pp.
200-208.
277
    In 1967 the Shāh had himself and his wife crowned.


51                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
than his? The country over which you ruled was but a part of his realm; Iraq, Egypt
and the Hijāz all belonged to his realm, as well as Iran. Despite this, his seat of
command was the mosque: the bench of the judge was situated in one corner of the
mosque, while in another, the army would prepare to set out for battle. That army was
composed of people who offered their prayers regularly, were firm believers in Islam;
you know well how swiftly it advanced and what results it obtained!”
        Today, the fuqahā of Islam are proof to the people. Just as the Most Noble
Messenger (‘a) was the proof of God---the conduct of all affairs was entrusted to him
so that whoever disobeyed him had a proof advanced against him---so, too, the fuqahā
are the proof of the Imām (‘a) to the people. All the affairs of the Muslims have been
entrusted to them. God will advance a proof and argument against anyone who
disobeys them in anything concerning government, the conduct of Muslim affairs, or
the gathering and expenditure of public funds.
        There can be no doubt concerning the meaning of the tradition we have
quoted, although it is possible to have certain reservations about its chain
transmission. Nonetheless, even if one does regard the tradition as being in its own
right, a proof of the thesis we have advanced, it serves to support the other proofs we
have mentioned.
        Another tradition that supports our thesis is the maqbūlah278 of ‘Umar ibn
Hanzalah. Since this narration refers to a certain verse of the Qur’an, we must first
discuss the verse in question as well as the verses that precede it in order to elucidate
its meaning, before we go on to examine the tradition. I seek refuge in Allah, from the
accursed Satan.
        In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.

        Verily God commands you to return trusts to their owners, and to act with justice when you
        rule among men. Verily, God counsels you thus, and God is all hearing, all seeing. O you who
        believe, obey God and obey the Messenger and the holders of authority from among you [i.e.,
        those entrusted with leadership and government]. When you dispute with each other
        concerning a thing, refer it to God and His Messenger; if you believe in God and the Last Day,
        this will be best for you and the result, most beneficial. (4: 58-59)

         In these verses, God commands us to return trusts to their owners. Some
people believe that what is meant here by “trusts” is twofold: trust pertaining to men
(i.e., their property), and those pertaining to the Creator (i.e., the ordinances of the
sharī‘ah).279 The sense of returning the divine trust would then be implementing the
ordinances of Islam correctly and completely. Another group of exegetes believes
instead that what is intended by “trust” is the imamate.280 There is indeed a tradition
that specifies: “We [the Imāms (‘a)] are those addressed in this verse,” for God
Almighty commands the Most Noble Messenger (s) and the Imāms to entrust
governance and leadership to their rightful possessors. Thus the Most Noble
Messenger (s) entrusted governance to the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), who
entrusted it to his successor, and each of his successors among the Imāms (‘a) handed
it on in turn.
         The verse goes on to say: “and to act with justice when you rule among men.”
Those addressed here are the person who hold the reins of affairs in their hands and
conduct the business of government—not judges, for the judge exercises only a

278
    Maqbūlah: a hadīth to which one may make acceptable reference.
279
    See, for example, Ismā‘īl Haqqi al-Burūsawi, Ruh al-Bayān (Istanbul, 1390/1970), II, 227-228.
280
    See, for example, Tabātabā’i, al-Mīzān, IV, 385.


52                                                                            Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
juridical function, not a governmental one. The judge is a ruler only in a limited sense;
the decrees that he issues are exclusively judicial, not executive. Indeed, in forms of
government that have emerged in recent centuries, the judges represent one of the
three branches of power, the other two being the executive (consisting of the council
of ministers) and the legislative or planning body (the assembly or parliament). More
generally, the judiciary is one of the branches of government and it fulfills one of the
tasks of government. We must therefore conclude that the phrase “when you rule
among men” relates to all the affairs of government, and includes both judges and
those belonging to the other branches of power.
        Now it has been established that since all the concerns of religion constitute a
divine trust; a trust that must be vested in its rightful possessors a part of the trust
must inevitably be government. Thus, in accordance with this verse, the conduct of all
governmental affairs must be based on the criteria of justice, or to put it differently, on
the law of Islam and the ordinances of the sharī‘ah. The judge may not issue an
incorrect verdict—i.e., one based on some illegitimate, non-Islamic code—nor may
the judicial procedure he follows or the law on which he bases his verdict be non-
Islamic and therefore invalid. For example, when those engaged in planning the
affairs of the country draw up a fiscal program for the nation, they must not impose
unjust taxes on peasants working on publicly owned lands, reducing them to
wretchedness and destroying the land and agriculture as a whole through the burden
of excessive taxation. If the executive branch of government wishes to implement the
juridical ordinances of the law and its penal provisions, they must not go beyond the
limits of the law by inflicting extra lashes upon the offender or abusing him.
        After the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) had cut off the hands of two thieves,
he showed such love and concern in treating them and attending to their needs that
they became his enthusiastic supporters. On another occasion, he heard that the
plundering army of Mu‘āwiyah had stolen an anklet from the foot of a dhimmi281
woman. He became so distraught and his sensibilities were so offended that he said in
a speech: “If a person were to die in circumstances such as mine, no one would
reproach him.” But despite all this sensitivity, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) was
a man who would draw his sword when it was necessary—to destroy the workers of
corruption—with all the strength he could muster. This is the true meaning of justice.
        The Most Noble Messenger (s) is the foremost example of the just ruler. When
he gave orders for the conquest of a certain area, the burning of a certain place, or the
destruction of a certain group whose existence was harmful for Islam, the Muslims,
and mankind in general, his orders were just. If he had not given orders such as these,
it would have meant neglecting the welfare of Islam, the Muslims, and human society.
        Anyone who rules over the Muslims, or over human society in general, must
always take into consideration, the public welfare and interest, and ignore personal
feelings and interests. For this reason, Islam is prepared to subordinate individuals to
the collective interest of society and has rooted out numerous groups that were a
source of corruption and harm to human society.
        Since the Jews of Bani Qurayza were a troublesome group, causing corruption
in Muslim society and damaging Islam and the Islamic state, the Most Noble
Messenger (‘a) eliminated them.282

281
   Dhimmi: one of the ahl adh-dhimmi, concerning whom see n. 35 above.
282
    The Bani Qurayza was a Jewish tribe inhabiting Medina. During the Battle of the Ditch (Ghazwat
al-Khandaq) in the fifth year of Islam, they collaborated with a Meccan force that came to attack the
city. The menfolk of the tribe were put to death for their treachery. See chapter 38, “The Last Stage of
Mischief,” of Āyatullāh Ja‘far Subhāni’s The Message (Karachi: Islamic Seminary Publications) [Pub.]


53                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
         Indeed, there are two essential qualities in a believer: he executes justice
whenever necessary, with the utmost force and decisiveness and without exhibiting
the least trace of feeling; and he displays the utmost love and solicitude whenever
they are called for. In these two ways, the believer comes to serve as a refuge for
society. Society, with both Muslim and non-Muslim members, will achieve security
and tranquility as the result of government exercised by believers, and everybody will
live in ease and without fear. The fact that men in our age live in fear of their rulers is
because existing governments are not based on law; they are a form of banditry. But
in the case of a government headed by someone like the Commander of the Faithful
(‘a), that is, in the case of an Islamic government, only the traitors and oppressors—
those who transgress and encroach on the rights of their fellows—suffer fear; for the
public at large, fear and anxiety are nonexistent.
         In the second of the two verses we have quoted, God Almighty says: “O you
who believe, obey God and obey the Messenger and the holders of authority among
you” (4:59).
         According to a certain tradition, the beginning of the first verse (“return trusts
to their owners”) is addressed to the Imāms (‘a), the next part of that verse,
concerning rule with justice, is addressed to those who exercise command, and the
second verse (“O you who believe…”) is addressed to the entire Muslim people. God
commands them to obey Him by following his divine ordinances, and to obey His
Most Noble Messenger (s) as well as the holders of authority (i.e., the Imāms) by
adhering to their teachings and following their governmental decrees.
         I have already said that obedience to the commands of God Almighty is
different from obedience to the Most Noble Messenger (s). All the ordinances of
divine law, whether or not they relate to worship, are the commands of God and to
implement them is to obey God. The Most Noble Messenger (s) did not issue any
commands concerning prayer, and if he urged men to pray, it was by way of
confirming and implementing God’s command. When we pray, we too are obeying
God; obeying the Messenger is different from obeying God.
         The commands of the Most Noble Messenger (s) are those that he himself
issued in the course of exercising his governmental function, as when, for example, he
commanded the Muslims to follow the army of Usāmah,283 to protect the frontiers of
the Islamic state in certain way, to levy taxes on certain categories of people, and in
general to interact with people in certain prescribed ways. All of these were
commands of the Prophet (s). God has laid upon us the duty of obeying the Messenger
(s). It is also our duty to follow and obey the holders of authority, who, according to
our beliefs, are the Imāms (‘a). Of course, obedience to their governmental decrees is
also a form of obedience to God. Since God Almighty has commanded us to follow
the Messenger (s) and the holders of authority, our obeying them is actually an
expression of obedience to God.
         The verse we have cited continues: “When you dispute with each other
concerning a thing, refer it to God and His Messenger.” Disputes that arise among
people are of two kinds. First, there is the dispute arising between two groups or two
individuals concerning a particular matter or claim. For example, someone may claim
that there is a debt owed him, while the order party denies it; the truth of the matter
must then be established, in accordance either with the sharī‘ah or with customary



283
      Usāmah: see n. 98 above.


54                                                                    Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
law.284 In such cases one must turn to judges, who will examine the matter and deliver
an appropriate verdict. The first kind of dispute then, is a civil one.
         The second kind of dispute does not concern a disagreement of this type, but
relates to oppression and crime. If a robber takes someone’s property by force, for
example, or makes illicit use of people’s property, or if a burglar inters someone’s
house and carries off his property, the competent authority to whom one should have
recourse is not the judge but the public prosecutor. In such matters as this, which
relates to penal not civil law (apart from some cases, which are simultaneously civil
and penal), it is primarily the public prosecutor who is the guardian of the law and its
ordinances and the protector of society. He begins his task by issuing an indictment,
and then the judge examines the matter and delivers a verdict. The verdicts issued,
whether civil or penal in nature, are put into effect by another branch of power, the
executive.
         The Qur’an says, then, in effect: “Whenever a dispute arises among you
concerning any matter, your point of reference must be God and His ordinances and
the Messenger (s), the executor of those ordinances. The Messenger (s) must receive
the ordinances from God and implement them. If any dispute arises among you
concerning a debt or loan, the Messenger (s) will intervene in his capacity as judge
and deliver a verdict. If other disputes arise involving unlawful coercion or the
usurpation of rights, again it is to the Prophet (s) that you should have recourse. Since
he is the head of the Islamic state, he is obliged to enact justice. He must dispatch an
official whose duty is to recover the usurped right and restore it to its owner. Further,
in any matter where people had recourse to the Messenger, recourse must be to the
Imāms, and obedience to the Imāms is, in effect, obedience to the Most Noble
Messenger (s).”
         In short, both of these verses with all their components embrace government in
general, as well as judgehood; they are not restricted in any way to the function of
judging, quiet aside from the consideration that certain verses of the Qur’an explicitly
relate to government in the sense of the executive.
         In the next verse, God says: “Have you not looked at those who claim to
believe in what was revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They wish to
seek justice from tāghūt [illegitimate powers], even though they have been
commanded to disbelieve in therein” (4:60). Even if we do not interpret tāghūt as
oppressive governments and all illicit forms of power that have revolted against
divine government in order to establish monarchy or some other form of rule, we must
still interpret it as including both judges and rulers. For customarily, one has recourse
to the judicial authorities to initiate legal proceedings and obtain redress and the
punishment of the offender, but then, the juridical verdict that they reach must be
implemented by the executive power, which usually forms a separate branch of the
government. Tyrannical governments—including the judiciary, the executives, and all
other components of the state—comprise what is meant by tāghūt, for they have
rebelled against divine command by instituting evil laws, implementing them, and
then making them the basis of judicial practice. God has commanded us to disbelieve
in them; that is, to revolt against them and their commands and ordinances. All who
wish to disbelieve, in this sense, in the tāghūt —that is, to rise up in disobedience
against illegitimate ruling powers —have a formidable duty that they must strive to
fulfill as far as they are able.

284
   The reference to customary law (‘urf) is not intended to sanction, but merely to clarify, existing
judicial practice.


55                                                                           Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
         Now let us examine the tradition known as the maqbūlah of ‘Umar ibn
Hanzalah to establish its meaning and intent. ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah says: “I asked
Imām as-Sādiq (‘a) whether it was permissible for two of the Shī‘ah who had a
disagreement concerning a dept or a legacy to seek the verdict of the ruler or judge.
He replied: ‘Any one who has recourse to the ruler or judge, whether his case be just
or unjust, has in reality had recourse to tāghūt [i.e. the illegitimate ruling power].
Whatever he obtains as result of their verdict, he will have obtained by forbidden
means, even if he has a proven right to it, for he will have obtained it through the
verdict and judgment of the tāghūt, that power which God Almighty has commanded
him to disbelieve in.’” (“They wish to seek justice from illegitimate powers, even
though they have been commanded to disbelieve therein” [4:60].)
         ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah then asked: “What should these two Shī‘ah do then, under
such circumstances?” Imām as-Sādiq (‘a) answered: “They must seek out one of you
who narrates our tradition, who is versed in what is permissible and what is forbidden,
who is well acquainted with our laws and ordinances, and accept him as judge and
arbiter, for I appoint him as judge over you.”285
As both the beginning and the conclusion of this tradition make clear, and also the
reference made by the Imām (‘a) to the Qur’anic verse, the scope of the question put
to the Imām was general, and the instructions he gave in response were also of general
validity. I said earlier that for the adjudication of both civil and penal cases, one must
have recourse to judges, as well as to the executive authorities or general
governmental authorities. One has recourse to judges in order to establish the truth,
reconcile enmities, or determine punishments; and to the executive authorities, in
order to obtain compliance with the verdict given by the judge and the enactment of
his verdict, whether the case is civil or penal in nature. It is for reason that in the
tradition under discussion the Imām (‘a) was asked whether we may have recourse to
the existing rulers and powers, together with their judicial apparatus.
In his answer, the Imām (‘a) condemns all recourse to illegitimate governments,
including both their executive and their judicial branches. He forbids the Muslims to
have recourse in any of their affairs to kings and tyrannical rulers, as well as to the
judges who act as their agents, even if they have some well-established right that they
wish to have enforced. Even if a Muslim’s son has been killed or his house has been
ransacked, he does not have the right of recourse to oppressive rulers in order to
obtain justice. Similarly, if a debt is owed to him and he has irrefutable evidence to
that effect, again he may not have recourse to judges who are the servants and
appointees of oppressors. If a Muslim does have recourse to them in such cases and
obtains his undeniable rights by means of those illegitimate powers and authorities,
the result he obtains will be harām,286 and he will have no right to make use of it.
Certain fuqahā have even gone so far as to say that, in cases where property is
restored, the same rule applies. For example, if your cloak is stolen from you, and you
regain it through the intervention of an illegitimate authority, you have no right to
wear it. This particular ruling is open to discussion, but there is no doubt in more
general cases. For example, if someone has a debt owed to him, and, in order to obtain
it, has recourse to a body or authority other than that specified by God, and he
subsequently receives his due, he may not legitimately put it to use. The fundamental
criteria of the sharī‘ah make this necessary.


285
      This tradition is contained in al-‘Āmili, Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah, XVII, 98.
286
      Harām: categorically forbidden by religious law.


56                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
So this is the political ruling of Islam. It is a ruling that makes Muslims refrain from
having recourse to illegitimate powers and their appointed judges, so that non-Islamic
and oppressive regimes may fall and the top-heavy judicial systems that produce
nothing for the people but trouble may be abolished. This, in turn would open the way
for having recourse to the Imāms (‘a) and those to whom they have assigned the right
to govern and judge. The main purpose was to prevent kings and the judges appointed
by them from attaining any form of authority, and people not to follow them. It has
been declared to the Islamic nation that they are not authorities whom to be referred
for God Himself had commanded men to disbelieve in kings and unjust rulers (i.e., to
rebel against them),287 and to have recourse to them would conflict with this duty. If
you disbelieve in them and regard them as oppressors who are unfit to rule you must
not have recourse to them.
What then is the duty of the Islamic community in this respect? What are they to do
when new problems occur and dispute arises among them? To what authority should
they have recourse? In the tradition previously quoted, the Imām (‘a) said: “They
must seek out one of you who narrates our traditions, who is versed in what is
permissible and what is forbidden”—that is, whenever disputes arise among them,
they should seek to have them resolved by those who narrate our hadith, are
acquainted with what God has made permissible or forbidden, and comprehend our
ordinances in accordance with the criteria of reason and the sharī‘ah. The Imām (‘a)
did not leave any room for ambiguity lest someone say: “So, scholars of traditions are
also to act as authorities and judges.” The Imām (‘a) mentioned all the necessary
qualifications and specified that the person to whom we have recourse must be able to
give an opinion concerning what is permissible and forbidden in accordance with the
well-known rules, must be knowledgeable with the ordinances of Islam, and must be
aware of the criteria needed to identify the traditions originating in taqiyyah or similar
circumstances (which are not to be taken as valid). It is obvious that such knowledge
of the ordinances of Islam and expertise in the science of tradition is different from
mere ability to narrate tradition.
In the same tradition the Imām (‘a) goes on to say: “I appoint him as ruler over
you”—that is, “I appoint as ruler over you one who possesses such qualifications; I
appoint anyone who possesses them to conduct the governmental and judicial affairs
of the Muslims, and the Muslims do not have the right to have recourse to anyone
other than him.” Therefore, if a robber steals your property, you should bring your
complaint to the authorities appointed by the Imām (‘a). If you have a dispute with
someone concerning debt or a loan and you need the truth of the matter to be
established, again you should refer the matter to the judge appointed by the Imām (‘a),
and not to anyone else. This is the universal duty of all Muslims, not simply of ‘Umar
ibn Hanzalah, who, when confronted by a particular problem, obtained the ruling.
This decree issued by the Imām (‘a), then, is general and universal in scope. For just
as the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), while he exercised rule, appointed governors
and judges whom all Muslims were bound to obey, so, too, Imām as-Sādiq (‘a),
holding absolute authority and empowerment to rule over all the ‘ulamā, the fuqahā,
and the people at large, was able to appoint rulers and judges not only for his own
lifetime, but also for subsequent ages. This indeed he did, naming the fuqahā as
“rulers,” so that no one might presume that their function was restricted to judicial
affairs and divorced from the other concerns of government.


287
      See Qur’an, 2:256.


57                                                                   Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
We may also deduce from the beginning and end of this tradition, as well as from the
Qur’anic verse to which it refers, that the Imām (‘a) was not concerned simply with
the appointing of judges and did not leave other duties of the Muslims unclarified, for
otherwise, one of the two questions posed to him—that concerned with seeking justice
from illicit executive authorities—would have remained unanswered.
This tradition is perfectly clear; there are no doubts surrounding its chain of
transmission or its meaning. No one can doubt that the Imām (‘a) designated the
fuqahā to exercise the functions of both government and judgeship. It is the duty of all
Muslims to obey this decree of the Imām (‘a).
In order to clarify the matter still further, I will adduce additional traditions, beginning
with that of Abū Khadījah.
Abū Khadījah, one of the trusted companions of Imām as-Sādiq (‘a), relates: “I was
commanded by the Imām (‘a) to convey the following message to our friends [i.e., the
Shī‘ah]: ‘When enmity and dispute arise among you, or you disagree concerning the
receipt or payment of a sum of money, be sure not to refer the matter to one of these
malefactors for judgment. Designate as judge and arbiter someone among you who is
acquainted with our injunctions concerning what is permitted and what is prohibited,
for I appoint such a man as judge over you. Let none of you take your complaint
against another of you to the tyrannical ruling power.’ ”288
The meaning of the phrase “dispute concerning a thing” relates to civil disputes, so
that the first part of the Imām’s decree means that we are not to have recourse to the
malefactors. Concerning part of the tradition which says “I appoint such a man as
judge over you” it becomes clear that ‘malefactors’ means those judges whom the
rulers of the day and illegitimate governments have allowed to occupy the position of
judge. The Imām (‘a) goes on to say “Let none of you take your complaint against
another of you to the tyrannical ruling power.” That is to say, “Whatever personal
disputes arise among you, do not have recourse to tyrannical authorities and
illegitimate powers; do not seek their aid in matters relating to the executive.” The
expression “tyrannical ruler” refers, in general, to all illegitimate powers and
authorities (that is, all non-Islamic rulers) and embraces all three branches of
government—judicial, legislative and executive. Considering that earlier in the
tradition, recourse to tyrannical judges is prohibited, however, it appears that this
second prohibition relates to the executive branch. The final sentence is not a
repetition of the preceding statement. First, the Imām prohibits having recourse to
impious judges in the various matters that are their concern (interrogation, the
establishment of proof, and so on), designates those who may act as judge, and
clarifies the duties of his followers. Then he declares that they must refrain from
having recourse to illegitimate rulers. This makes it plain that the question of judges is
separate from that of having recourse to illegitimate authority; they are two different
subjects. Both are mentioned in the tradition of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah; there, the
seeking of justice from both illegitimate authorities and judges is forbidden. In the
tradition of Abū Khadijah the Imām (‘a) has appointed only judges, but in that
reported by ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah the Imām (‘a) has designated both those who are to
act as ruler and executive and those who are to act as judge.
In accordance with the tradition narrated Abu Khadījah, then, the Imām (‘a)
designated the fuqahā as judges in his own lifetime, and according to that narrated by
‘Umar ibn Hanzalah, he assigned them both governmental and judicial authority. We
must now examine whether the fuqahā automatically forfeited those functions when

288
      See al-‘Āmili, Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah, XVIII, 100.


58                                                                    Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
the Imām (‘a) left this world? Were all the judges and rulers appointed by the Imāms
(‘a) somehow dismissed from their functions when the Imāms (‘a) left?
The governance of the Imāms (‘a) differs, of course, from that of all others; according
to the Shi‘ah school, all the commands and instructions of the Imāms (‘a) must be
obeyed, both during their lifetime and after their death. But, aside from this
consideration, let us see what becomes of the functions and duties they have assigned
in this world to the fuqahā.
In all existing forms of government whether monarchical, republican, or following
some other model, if the head of state dies or circumstances change so that there is a
change in administration, military ranks and appointments are not affected. For
example, a general will not automatically be deprived of his rank, an ambassador will
not be dismissed from his post, and a minister of finance or a provincial or local
governor will not be removed. The new administration or successor administration
may, of course, dismiss or transfer them from their posts, but their functions are not
automatically withdrawn from them.
Obviously, certain powers do automatically terminate with death of the person who
conferred them. Such is the case with ijāza-yi hasbiyyah, the authority given to
someone by a faqīh to fulfill certain tasks on his behalf in a given town; when the
faqīh dies, this authority expires. But, in another case, if a faqīh appoints a guardian
for a minor or a trustee for an endowment, the appointments he makes are not
annulled by his death but continue in force.
The judicial and governmental functions assigned by the Imāms to the fuqahā of
Islam are retained permanently. The Imām (‘a) was certainly aware of all aspects of
the matter, and there can be no possibility of carelessness on his part. He must have
known that in all governments of the world the position and authority of individual
officeholders is not affected by the death or departure of the head of state. If he had
intended that the right to govern and judge should be withdrawn after his death from
the fuqahā whom he had designated, he would have specified that to be the case,
saying: “The fuqahā are to exercise these functions as long as I live.”
According to this tradition, then, the ‘ulamā of Islam have been appointed by the
Imām (‘a) to the positions of ruler and judge, and these positions belong to them in
perpetuity. The possibility that the next Imām would have annulled this decree and
dismissed the fuqahā from these twin functions is extremely small. For the Imām
forbade the Muslims to have recourse to kings and their appointed judges for
obtaining their rights, and designated recourse to them as equivalent to recourse to the
tāghūt; then, referring to the verse that ordains disbelief in tāghūt,289 he appointed
legitimate judges and rulers for the people. If his successor as Imām were not to have
assigned the same functions to the fuqahā or to the new ones, what should the
Muslims have done, and how would they have resolved their differences and
disputes? Should they have had recourse to sinners and oppressors, which would have
been equivalent to recourse to the tāghūt and thus a violation of divine command? Or
should they have had recourse to no one at all, depriving themselves of all authority
and refuge, which would have allowed anarchy to take over, with people freely
usurping each other’s property, transgressing against each other’s rights, and being
completely unrestrained in all they did?
We are certain that if Imām as-Sādiq (‘a) assigned these functions to the fuqahā,
neither his son Mūsā (‘a) nor any of the succeeding Imāms (‘a) abrogated them.
Indeed, it is not possible for them to have abrogate these functions and said:

289
      Here, “disbelief” implies disobedience. See p. 92.


59                                                                 Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
“Henceforth, do not have recourse to the just fuqahā for the settlement of your affairs;
instead, turn to kings, or do nothing at all and allow your rights to be trampled
underfoot.”
Naturally, if an Imām appoints a judge to a certain city, his successor may dismiss that
judge and appoint another in his place, but the positions and functions that have been
established cannot themselves be abolished. That is self-evident.
The tradition that I shall now quote supports the thesis I have been advancing. If the
only proof I had were one of the traditions I have been citing, I would be unable to
substantiate my claim. Its essence, however, has been proved by the traditions already
cited; what follows now is by way of supplementary evidence. Imām as-Sādiq (‘a)
relates that the Prophet (s) said: “For whomever travels a path in search of knowledge,
God opens up a path to paradise, and the angels lower their wings before him as a sign
of their being well pleased [or God’s being well pleased]. All that is in the heavens
and on earth, even the fish in the ocean, seeks forgiveness for him. The superiority of
the learned man over the mere worshipper is like that of the full moon over the stars.
Truly the scholars are the heirs of prophets (‘a); the prophets bequeathed not a single
dinār or dirham; instead they bequeathed knowledge, and whoever acquires it has
indeed acquired a generous portion of their legacy.”290
The links in the chain of transmission of this tradition are all trustworthy; in fact,
Ibrāhīm ibn Hāshim, father of ‘Ali ibn Ibrāhīm, is not moderately trustworthy but
outstandingly so. The same tradition has been narrated with a slightly different text by
another chain of transmission, one that is sound as far as Abū ’l-Bukhtūri although
Abū’l-Bukhtūri himself is of questionable reliability. Here is the second version of the
tradition: “Muhammad ibn Yahyā relates, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn Īsā, who was told it by Muhammad ibn Khālid, to whom it was narrated by Abū
’l- Bukhtūri, that Imām Ja‘far as-Sādiq (‘a) said: ‘The scholars are the heirs of the
prophets, for although the prophets bequeathed not a single dinār or dirham, they
bequeathed their sayings and traditions. Whoever, then, acquires a portion of their
traditions has indeed acquired a generous portion of their legacy. Therefore, see from
whom you may acquire this knowledge, for among us, the Family of the Prophet,
there are in each generation just and honest people who will repel those who distort
and exaggerate, those who initiate false practices, and those who offer foolish
interpretations [that is, they will purify and protect religion from the influence of such
biased and ignorant people and others like them].’ ”291
Our purpose in citing this tradition (which has also been referred to by the late Narāqi)
is that it clarifies the meaning of the expression: “The scholars are the heirs of the
prophets.” There are several matters that must be explained at this point.
First, who are “the scholars”? Is it intended to mean the scholars of the Muslim
community or the Imāms (‘a)? Some people are of the opinion probably the Imāms
are intended. But it would appear that, on the contrary, the scholars of the
community—the ‘ulamā—are intended. The tradition itself indicates this, for the
virtues and qualities of the Imāms (‘a) that have mentioned elsewhere are quite
different from what this tradition contains. The statement that the prophets (‘a) have
bequeathed traditions and whoever learns those traditions acquires a generous portion
of their legacy cannot serve as a definition of the Imāms. It must therefore refer to the
scholars of the community. In addition, in the version narrated by Abū ’l-Bukhtūri,
after the phrase: “The scholars are the heirs of the prophets,” we read: “Therefore, see

290
      This tradition is quoted in Kulayni, al-Kāfi, I, ii, 85-86.
291
      Kulayni, al-Kāfi, I, 78-79.


60                                                                   Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
from whom you may acquire this knowledge.” It seems that what is intended here is
that, indeed, the scholars are the heirs of the prophets, but one must be careful in the
choice of a person from whom to acquire the knowledge the prophets have
bequeathed. It will contradict the obvious meaning of the tradition, therefore, to
maintain that the Imāms are intended by the expression “heirs of the prophets” and
that it is from them that people must acquire knowledge. Anyone acquainted with the
traditions that relate to the status of the Imāms (‘a) and the rank accorded them by the
Most Noble Messenger (s) will immediately realize that it is not the Imāms but the
scholars of the community who are intended in this tradition. Similar qualities and
epithets have been used for the scholars in numerous other traditions; e.g., “The
scholars of my community are like the prophets preceding me,” and “The scholars of
my community are like the prophets of the Children of Israel.”
To conclude, then, it is obvious that the ‘ulamā—the scholars—are intended here.
There is a second objection that might be raised here, which calls for clarification. It
might be said that the expression: “The scholars are the heirs of the prophets” cannot
be used as a proof of our thesis—the governance of the faqīh—since the prophets
(anbiyā) have only one dimension of prophethood, which is that they derive
knowledge from an exalted source by means of revelation, inspiration, or some other
method, and this does not imply or require rule over the people or the believers. If
God Almighty has not bestowed leadership and rule on the prophets, they can in no
wise possess it; they are only prophets in the narrow sense of the word. If they have
been ordained to communicate the knowledge they have received, then it will be their
duty at most to communicate it to the people. For in our traditions, a distinction is
made between the prophet (nabī) and the messenger (rasūl): the latter has the mission
of communicating the knowledge he has received, while the former merely receives it.
In addition, the state of prophethood (nubuwwat) is different from that of governance
(wilāyat), and it is this titular designation of “prophet” (nabī) that has been used in
this tradition. The scholars have been made the successors of the prophets with
respect to this titular designation, and since this designation does not imply or
necessitate governance (wilāyat), we cannot deduce from the tradition that the
scholars are to possess governance. If the Imām had said that the scholars hold the
rank of Moses or Jesus, we would naturally infer that the scholars possess all of the
aspects and qualities of Moses or Jesus, including governance, but since he did not
say this and did not assign to the scholars the rank of any particular person among the
prophets, we cannot draw that particular conclusion from the tradition in question.
In answer to this objection, it must first be stated that the criterion for the
understanding of traditions and their wording must be common usage and current
understanding, not precise technical analysis, and we, too, follow this criterion. Once
a faqīh tries to introduce subtle technical points into the understanding of traditions,
many matters become obscured. So, if we examine the expression: “The scholars are
the heirs of the prophets” in the light of common usage, will it occur to us that only
the titular designation of “prophet” is intended in the tradition, and that the scholars
are heirs only to what is implied in that designation? Or on the contrary, does this
expression provide a general principle that can be applied to individual prophets? To
put it differently, if we were to ask someone who is aware only of the common usage
of word, “Is such-and-such a faqīh a successor of Moses and Jesus?” He would
answer—in the light of the tradition under discussion—“Yes, because Moses and
Jesus are prophets.” Again, if we were to ask, “Is the faqīh an heir to the Most Noble
Messenger (s)?” he would answer, “Yes, because the Most Noble Messenger is one of
the prophets.”


61                                                                 Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
We cannot, therefore, take the word “prophets” as a titular designation, particularly
since it is in the plural. If the singular “prophet” were used in the tradition, then it
might be possible that only the titular designation was intended, but since the plural is
used, it means “every one of the prophets,” not “every one of the prophets with
respect to that by virtue of which they are prophets.” This latter sense would indeed
indicate that the titular designation exclusively was intended, as distinct from all other
designations, so that the expression would come to mean, “The faqīh enjoys the
stature of the prophet (nabī), but not that of the messenger (rasūl) nor that of the ruler
(wali).” Analyses and interpretations like these, however, go against both common
usage and reason.
For a third objection, let us suppose that the scholars are given the stature of the
prophets with respect to their titular designation, with respect to that by virtue of
which they are prophets. We must then regard the scholars as possessing all the
attributes that God Almighty has designated the prophets as possessing, in accordance
with this same equation of the scholars with the prophets. If, for example, some one
says that so-and-so enjoys the same rank as the just and says next that we must honor
the just, we infer from the two statements taken together that we must honor the
person in question. This being the case, we can infer from the Qur’anic verse: “The
prophet has higher claims on the believers than their own selves” (33:6) that the
‘ulamā possess the function of governance just as the prophet does. For what is
implicit in having “higher claims” is precisely governance and command. In
commenting upon the verse in question, the work Majma‘ al-Bahrayn292 cites a
tradition of Imām al-Bāqir (‘a): “This verse was revealed concerning governance and
command”. The prophet, then, is empowered to rule and govern over the believers,
and the same rule and governance that has been established for the Most Noble
Messenger (s) is also established for the scholars for both in the verse quoted and in
the tradition under discussion the titular designation “prophet” has been used.
We can, moreover, refer to a number of verses that designate the prophet as
possessing various qualities and attributes, as, for example: “Obey God and obey the
Messenger and the holders of authority from among you” (Qur’an, 4:59). Although a
distinction is made in certain traditions between “prophet” and “messenger” with
respect to the mode of revelation, rationally and in common usage the two words
denote the same meaning. According to common usage, the “prophet” is one who
receives tidings from God, and the “messenger” is one who conveys to mankind what
he has received from God.
A fourth objection might also be raised. The ordinances that the Most Noble
Messenger (s) left are a form of legacy, even though they are not designated
technically as such, and those who take up those ordinances are his heirs. But what
proof is there that the function of governance that the Prophet (s) exercised could be
bequeathed and inherited? It might be that what could be bequeathed and inherited
consisted only of his ordinances and his traditions, for the tradition states that the
prophets bequeathed knowledge, or, in the version narrated by Abu ’l-Bukhturi, that
they bequeathed “a legacy of their sayings and traditions.” It is apparent, then, that
they bequeathed their traditions, but governance cannot be bequeathed or inherited.
This objection is also unjustified. For governance and command are extrinsic and
rational matters; concerning these matters, we must have recourse to rational persons.
We might ask them whether they regard the transfer of governance and rule from one
292
   There are a number of works by this title. The reference here may be to the Qur’an commentary
written in the eleventh/seventh century by Ziyā ad-Dīn Yūsuf Qazvīni. See Āqā Buzurg Tehrāni, Adh-
Dhāri‘ah ilā Tasānif ash-Shī‘ah (Tehran, 1390/1970), XX, 23.


62                                                                         Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
person to another by way of bequest as possible. For example, if a rational person is
asked, “Who is heir to the rule in such-and-such a country?” will he answer that the
position of ruler cannot be inherited, or say instead that such-and-such a person is the
heir to the crown and the throne? “Heir the throne” is a well-known current
expression. There can be no doubt that rationally speaking governance can be
transferred from one person to another just like property that is inherited. If one
considers first the verse: “The prophet has higher claims on the believers than their
own selves,” and then the tradition: “The scholars are the heirs of the prophets,” he
will realize that both refer to the same thing: extrinsic matters that are rationally
capable of being transferred from one person to another.
If the phrase: “The scholars are the heirs of the prophets” referred to the Imāms (‘a)—
as does the tradition to the effect that the Imāms are the heirs of the Prophet (s) in all
things—we would not hesitate to say that the Imāms are indeed the heirs of Prophet in
all things, and no one could say that the legacy intended here refers only to knowledge
and legal questions. So if we had before us only the sentence: “The scholars are the
heirs of the prophets” and could disregard the beginning and end of the tradition, it
would appear that all functions of the Most Noble Messenger (‘a) that were capable of
being transmitted—including rule over people—and that devolved on the Imāms after
him, pertain also to the fuqahā, with the exception of those functions that must be
excluded for other reasons and which we too exclude wherever there is reason to do
so.
The major problem still remaining is that the sentence: “The scholars are heirs of the
prophets” occurs in a context suggesting that the traditions of the prophets constitute
their legacy. The authentic tradition narrated by Qaddāh reads: “The prophets
bequeathed not a single dinār or dirham; instead they bequeathed knowledge.” That
related by Abū ’l–Bukhtūri reads: “Although the prophets did not bequeath a single
dinār or dirham; they bequeathed their sayings and traditions.” These statements
provide a context suggesting that the legacy of the prophets is their traditions, and that
nothing else has survived of them that might be inherited, particularly since the
particle “innamā” occurs in the text of the tradition, indicating exclusivity.
But even this objection is faulty. For if the meaning were indeed that the Most Noble
Messenger (s) had left nothing of himself that might be inherited except his traditions,
this would contradict the very bases of our Shi’ah school. The Prophet (s) did indeed
leave things that could be inherited, and there is no doubt that among them was his
exercise of rule over the community, which was transmitted by him to the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a), and then to each of the other Imāms (‘a) in
succession. The particle “innamā” does not always indicate exclusivity, and indeed
there are doubts that it ever does; in addition, “innamā” does not occur in the text
narrated by Qaddāh, but only in that related by Abu ’l- Bukhturi whose chain of
transmission is weak, as I have already said.
Now let us examine in turn each of the sentences in the text narrated by Qaddāh in
order to see whether the context does, in fact, indicate that the legacy of the prophets
consists exclusively of their traditions.
“For whoever travels a path in search of knowledge, God opens up a path to
paradise.” This is a sentence in praise of scholars, but not in praise of any scholar, so
that we imagine the sentence to be uniformly praising all types of scholar. Look up
the traditions in al-Kāfi concerning the attributes and duties of scholars, and you will
see that in order to become a scholar and an heir of the prophets, it is not enough to
study a few lines. The scholar also has duties he must perform, and therein lies the
real difficulty of his calling.


63                                                                   Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
“The angels lower their wings before him as a sign of their being well pleased with
him.” The meaning of “lower their wings” is obvious to those who concern
themselves with these matters. It is an act signifying humility and respect.
“All that is in the heavens and on earth, even the fish in the ocean, seeks forgiveness
for him.” This sentence does not require detailed explanation because it is not relevant
to our present theme.
“The superiority of the learned man over the mere worshipper is like that of the full
moon over the stars.” The meaning of this sentence is clear.
“Truly the scholars are the heirs of the prophets.” The entire tradition, from its
beginning down to and including this sentence, is in praise of the scholars and in
exposition of their virtues and qualities, one of these qualities being that they are the
heirs of the prophets. Being the heirs of the prophets becomes a virtue for the scholars
when they exercise governance and rule over people, like the prophets, and obedience
to them is a duty.
The meaning of the next expression in the tradition, “The prophets bequeathed not a
single dinār or dirham,” is not that they bequeathed nothing but learning and
traditions. Rather it is an indication that although the prophets exercised authority and
ruler over people, they were men of God, not materialistic creatures trying to
accumulate worldly wealth. It also implies that the form of government exercised by
the prophets was different from monarchies and other current forms of government,
which have served as means for the enrichment and gratification of the rulers.
The way of life of the Most Noble Messenger (s) was extremely simple. He did not
use his authority and position to enrich his material life in the hope of leaving a
legacy. What he did leave behind was knowledge, the most noble of all things, and in
particular, knowledge derived from God Almighty. Indeed, the singling out of
knowledge for mention in this tradition may have been precisely because of its
nobility.
It cannot be said that since the qualities of the scholars are mentioned in this verse
together with their being heirs to knowledge and not heirs to property, therefore, the
scholars are heirs only to knowledge and traditions.
In certain cases, the phrase: “What we leave behind is charity” has been added to the
tradition, but it does not truly belong there. Found only in Sunni versions of the
traditions, it has been added for political reasons.293
The most we can say with respect to the context these sentences provide for the
statement: “The scholars are heirs to the prophets” is that the statement cannot be
taken in an absolute sense, which would mean that everything that pertains to the
prophets also pertains to the scholars. Nor can the statement, because of its context, be
taken in the restricted sense that the scholars are heirs only to the knowledge of the
prophets. If that were sense, the tradition would contradict the other traditions we


293
    After the death of the Prophet (s), his daughter Fātimah asked for the arable lands near Fadak (a
small town near Medina) to be assigned to her as a legacy from her father, since in his lifetime the
Prophet had used the produce of the land for the upkeep of his wives. Abū Bakr refused, citing the
alleged words of the Prophet: “We prophets bequeath no legacies; what we leave behind is charity
(sadaqah).” See al-Balādhūri, al-Futūh, ed. de Goeje (Leiden, Netherlands, 1886), pp. 29-33. For Shī‘i
tradition, Fadak became a symbol of unjust denial. “The Shī‘ah traditionists and exegetes and some
Sunni scholars write: “When the verse: Give the kinsmen his due, and the needy, and the
wayfarer…(Sūrah Isrā, 17:26) was revealed the Prophet called her daughter Fātimah and made over
Fadak to her” [Majma‘ al-Bayān, vol. III, p. 411; Sharh-i Ibn Abi ’l-Hadīd, vol. XVI, p. 248]. And the
narrator of this incident is Abū Sa‘īd al-Khudri who was one of the distinguished companions of the
Prophet.” Subhāni, The Message, chap. 44, “The Story of Fadak,”


64                                                                            Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
quoted earlier in connection with our theme and tend to neglect them. This restricted
sense cannot be derived from this.

For the sake of argument, if it were true that this tradition means that the Most Noble
Messenger (s), left no legacy but knowledge, and that rulership and governance can be
neither bequeathed nor inherited, and if, too, we did not infer from the Prophet’s
saying: “‘Ali is my heir” that the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) was indeed his
successor, then we would be obliged to have recourse to nass294 with respect to the
successorship of the Commander of the Faithful and the remaining Imāms (‘a). We
would then follow the same method with respect to the exercise of governance by the
faqīh, for according to the tradition cited above, the fuqahā have been appointed to the
function of successorship and rule. Thus, we have reconciled this tradition with those
that indicate appointment.
In his ‘Awā’id,295 Narāqi quotes the following tradition from the Fiqh-i Razāvi:296
“The rank of the faqīh in the present age is like that of the prophets of the Children of
Israel.” Naturally, we cannot claim that the Fiqh-i Razāvi was actually composed by
Imām Ridā (‘a), but it is permissible to quote it as a further support for our thesis.
It must be understood that what is meant by “the prophets of the Children of Israel” is
indeed the prophets, not fuqahā who lived in the time of Moses and may have been
called prophets for some reason or other. The fuqahā who lived in the time of Moses
were all subject to his authority, and exercised their functions in obedience to him. It
may be that when he dispatched them somewhere to convey a message, he would also
appoint them as “holder of authority”—naturally, we are not precisely informed about
these matters—but it is obvious that Moses himself was one of the prophets of the
Children of Israel, and that all of the functions that existed for the Most Noble
Messenger (s) also existed for Moses, with a difference, of course, in rank, station,
and degree. We deduce from the general scope of the word “rank” in this tradition,
therefore, that the same function of rulership and governance that Moses exercised
exists also for fuqahā.
The Jāmi’ al-Akhbār297 contains the following tradition of the Most Noble Messenger
(s): “On the Day of Judgment I will take pride in the scholars of my community, for
the scholars of my community are like the prophets preceding me.” This tradition also
serves to support my thesis.
In the Mustadrak,298 a tradition is quoted from the Ghurār299 to the following effect:
“The scholars are rulers over the people.” One version reads “hukamā” (“wise men”)
instead of “hukkām” (“rulers”), but this appears to be incorrect. According to the
Ghurār, the form “hukkām” is correct. The meaning of this tradition is self-evident,
and if its chain of transmission is valid, it may also serve to support my thesis.




294
    Nass: a clear and authoritative text, unequivocal in its meaning.
295
    Narāqi (n. 107 above) wrote a comprehensive book on the principles of fiqh entitled ‘Awā’id al-
Ayyām min Qawā‘id al-Fuqahā al-A‘lam.
296
    Fiqh-i Razāvi: a work purporting to contain the legal pronouncements of Imām Ridā, of disputed
authenticity. See Tehrāni, adh-Dhāri‘ah, XVI, 292-293.
297
    See n. 74 above.
298
     Mustadrak: that is, Mustadrak al-Wasā’il, a supplement to Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah (see n. 105)
composed by Mīrzā Husayn Nūri (d. 1320/1902).
299
    Possibly Ghurār al-Farā’id was Durār al-Qalā’id, a work on the principles of fiqh by Muhsīn ibn
Hasan al-A’raji (d.1227/1812). See Tehrāni, Adh-Dhāri‘ah, XVI, 41-42.


65                                                                          Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
There are still additional traditions that may be quoted. One of them is quoted in
Tuhāf al-‘Uqūl300 under the heading: “The Conduct of Affairs and the Enforcement of
Ordinances by the Scholars.” This tradition consists of two parts. The first is a
tradition transmitted by the Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a) from the Commander of the
Faithful, ‘Ali (‘a), and concerns the enjoining of the good and the prohibition of the
evil. The second part is the speech of the Doyen of the Martyrs concerning the
governance of the faqīh and the duties that are incumbent upon the fuqahā, such as the
struggle against oppressors and tyrannical governments in order to establish an
Islamic government and implement the ordinances of Islam. In the course of this
celebrated speech, which he delivered at Mīnah,301 he set forth the reasons for his own
jihād against the tyrannical Umayyad state. Two important themes may be deduced
from this tradition. The first is the principle of the governance of the faqīh, and the
second is that the fuqahā, by means of jihād and enjoying the good and forbidding the
evil, must expose and overthrow tyrannical rulers and rouse the people so that the
universal movement of all alert Muslims can establish Islamic government in place of
tyrannical regimes.
This is the tradition.302 The Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a) said: “O people, take heed of
the counsel God gave His friends when he rebuked the rabbis by saying, ‘Why do
their scholars and rabbis not forbid their sinful talk and consumption of what is
forbidden [that is, such talk and consumption on the part of the Jews]? Truly what
they have done is evil’ (Qur’an, 5:63). Again God says: “Cursed by the tongue of
David and Jesus, son of Mary, are those among the Children of Israel who have failed
to believe on account of their rebellion and transgression. They did not prevent each
other from committing vile and corrupt acts; truly what they did was abominable!”
(Qur’an, 5:78). God blamed and reproached them because they saw with their own
eyes the oppressors committing vile and corrupt acts but did not stop them, out of love
for the income they received from them as well as fear of persecution and injury.
However, God orders us to fear Him, not men, and He says: “And the believing men
and women are friends and protectors of each other; they enjoin the good and forbid
the evil” (Qur’an, 9:71).
“We see that this verse, in the course of enumerating the attributes of the believers,
the attributes that indicate mutual affection, solitude, and desire to guide each other,
God begins with enjoining the good and forbidding the evil, considering this the
prime duty. For He knows that if this duty is performed and is established within
society, performance of all other duties will follow, from the easiest to the most
difficult. The reason for this is that enjoining the good and forbidding the evil means
summoning people to Islam, which is a struggle to establish correct belief in the face
of external opposition, while at the same time vindicating the rights of the oppressed;
opposing and struggling against oppressors within the community; and endeavoring to
ensure that public wealth and the income derived from war are distributed in
accordance with the just laws of Islam, and that taxes [zakāt and all other forms of
fiscal income, whether compulsory or voluntary] are collected, levied, and expended
in due and proper form.


300
     Tuhāf al-‘Uqūl: a collection of sermons and aphorisms of the Imāms compiled by Shaykh
Muhammad al-Halabi, a contemporary of Shaykh Sadūq and teacher of Shaykh Mufīd.
301
    Mīnah: a small town near Mecca.
302
    Imām Khomeini quotes the Arabic text of the tradition before giving his own translation in Persian.
We have rendered into English only the Persian translation, which is slightly fuller in parts than the
Arabic original.


66                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
“O scholars, you who are celebrated and enjoy good repute on account of your
learning! You have achieved fame in society because of your devotion, the good
counsel you impart, and the guidance you dispense. It is on account of God that men
venerate and stand in awe of you, so that even the powerful fear you and feel
compelled to rise respectfully before you, and men who are not subject to you and
over whom you hold no authority willingly regard themselves as your subordinates
and grant you favors they deny themselves. When the people do not receive their due
from the public treasury, you intervene and act with the awesomeness and
imperiousness of monarchs and the stature of the great. Have you not earned all these
forms of respect and prestige because of men’s hopes that you will implement God’s
laws, even though in most instances you have failed to do so?
“You have failed to enforce most of the rights you were entrusted to preserve. For
instance, you have neglected the rights of the oppressed and the lowly, squandered the
rights of the weak and the powerless, but pursed assiduously what you regard as your
personal rights. You have not spent your money or risked your lives for the sake of
the One Who gave you life, nor have you fought against any group or tribe for the
sake of God. You desire, and regard it as your due, that He should grant you paradise,
the company of the Prophet, and security from hellfire in the hereafter. You who have
such expectations of God, I fear that the full weight of His wrath will descend upon
you, for although it is by his might and glory that you have achieved high rank, you
show no respect to those who truly know God and wish to disseminate their
knowledge while you yourselves enjoy respect among God’s bondsmen on His
account.
“I am also afraid for you for another reason: you see the covenants enacted with God*
being violated and trampled underfoot; yet you show no anxiety. When it comes to the
covenants enacted with your fathers, you become greatly disturbed and anxious if they
are only violated in part, but the pledges you have given to the Most Noble
Messenger** are a matter of complete indifference to you. The blind, the dumb, and
the poverty-stricken cultivators of the land everywhere lack protectors and no mercy
is shown them. You do not behave in accordance with your function and rank, nor do
you support or pay any regard to those who do so behave and who strive to promote
the standing of the religious scholars. You purchase your safety from the oppressive
ruling powers with flattery, cajolery and compromise.
 “All these activities have been forbidden you by God, and He has, moreover,
commanded you to forbid each other to engage in them, but you pay no attention. The
disaster that has befallen you is greater than what has befallen others, for the true rank
and degree of ‘ulamā has been taken away from you. The administration of the
country, the issuing of judicial decrees, and the approving of legislative programs
should actually be entrusted to religious scholars who are guardians of the rights of
God and knowledgeable about God’s ordinances concerning what is permitted and
what is forbidden. But your position has been usurped from you, for no other reason
than that you have abandoned the pivot of truth—the law of Islam and God’s
decree—and have disagreed about the nature of the Sunnah, despite the existence of
clear proofs.


*
  That is, the social contracts that establish the institutions of society and determine social relations in
Islam. (Kh.)
**
   That is, Islamic relationships based upon the oath of loyalty sworn to the Prophet and similar pledge
to obey and follow his successors, ‘Ali and his descendants, given to the Prophet at the pool of Khum.
(Kh).


67                                                                                 Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
“If you were true men, strong in the face of torture and suffering and prepared to
endure hardship for God’s sake, then all proposed regulations would be brought to
you for your approval and for you to issue; authority would lie in your hands. But you
allowed the oppressors to take away your function, and permitted that the
government, which is supposed to be regulated by the provisions of the sharī‘ah, to
fall into their hands so that they administer it on the shaky basis of their own
conjectures and suppositions and make arbitrariness and the satisfaction of lust their
consistent practice. What enabled them to gain control of government was your
fleeing in panic from being killed, your attachment to the transitory life of this world.
With that mentality and the conduct it inspires, you have delivered the powerless
masses into the clutches of the oppressors. While some cringe like slaves under the
blows of the oppressors, and others search in misery and desperation for bread and
water, the rulers are entirely absorbed in the pleasures of kingship, earning shame and
disgrace for themselves with their licentiousness, following evil counselors, and
showing impudence toward God. One of their appointed spokesmen mounts the
minbar303 in each city. The soil of the homeland is defenseless before them, and they
grab freely whatever they want of it. The people are their slaves, and are powerless to
defend themselves. One ruler is a dictator by nature, malevolent and rancorous;
another represses his wretched subjects ruthlessly, plundering by imposing on them
all kinds of burdens; and still another refuses in his absolutism to recognize either
God or the Day of Judgment! Is it not strange—how can one not think it strange—that
society is in the clutches of a cunning oppressor whose tax collectors are oppressors
and whose governors feel no compassion or mercy toward the believers under their
rule?
“It is God Who will judge concerning what is at dispute among us and deliver a
decisive verdict concerning all that occurs among us.
“O God! You know that everything we did [that is, the struggle in which they had
recently engaged against the Umayyads] was not prompted by rivalry for political
power, nor by a search for wealth and abundance; rather it was done in order to
demonstrate to men the shining principles and values of Your religion, to reform the
affairs of Your land, to protect and secure the indisputable rights of Your oppressed
servants, and to act in accordance with the duties You have established and the norms,
laws, and ordinances You have decreed.
“So, O scholars of religion! You are to help us reach this goal, win back our rights
from those powers who have considered it acceptable to wrong you and who have
attempted to put out the light kindled by your Prophet. God the One suffices us—upon
Him do we rely, to Him do we turn, in His hands lies our fate, and to Him shall we
return.”
When the Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a) said at the beginning of this sermon: “O people,
take heed of the counsel God gave His friends when He rebuked the rabbis,” his
address was not restricted to a particular group of people—those present in the
assembly, the inhabitants of a certain city, town, or country, or even all people alive in
the world at the time. Rather it embraces all who hear the summons at whatever time,
for it begins with the expression “O people” (yā ayyuha ’n-nās), which occurs in the
Qur’an with the same universal meaning.304 When God rebukes the rabbis—the
Jewish scholars—and condemns their behavior, He is at the same time addressing His
friends (awliyā) and advising them. The word “awliyā” means here those who have

303
      Minbar: the pulpit in the mosque.
304
      See, for example, 2:168, 4:170, 7:150, 10:57, and many other verses.


68                                                                           Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
set their faces toward God and hold responsible positions in society, not the Twelve
Imāms.305
God says in the verse we are examining: “Why do their scholars and rabbis not forbid
their sinful talk and consumption of what is forbidden? Truly what they have done is
evil.” Thus He reproaches the rabbit and Jewish religious scholars for failing to
prevent the oppressors’ sinful talk—a term that includes lying, slander, distorting the
truth, and so forth—and consumption of what is forbidden. It is obvious that, this
reproach and upbraiding is not confined to the scholars of the Jews, nor for that matter
to those of the Christians; it applies also to the religious scholars in Islamic society, or
indeed, any other society. If the religious scholars of Islamic society are silent,
therefore, in the face of the policies of the oppressors, they too are reproached and
condemned by God; and here there is no distinction between scholars of the past,
present, and future—they are equal in this regard. The Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a)
made reference to this verse of Qur’an so that the religious scholars of Islamic society
would take heed, awaken, and no longer neglect their duty of enjoining the good and
forbidding the evil or stay silent in the face of the oppressive and deviant ruling
classes.
There are two points to which he draws attention by citing this verse. First, the
religious scholars’ neglect of their duties is more harmful than the failure of others to
perform their normal duties. If a bazaar merchant, for example, does something
wrong, it is only he who suffers the harm that results. But if the religious scholars fail
in fulfilling their duties, by keeping silent, let us say, in the face of tyranny, Islam
itself suffers as a result. But if, on the contrary, they act in accordance with their duty
and speak out when they should, eschewing silence, then Islam itself will benefit.
Secondly, although all things contrary to the sharī‘ah must be forbidden, emphasis
has been placed on sinful talk and consumption of what is forbidden, implying that
these two evils are more dangerous than all the others and must therefore be more
diligently combated. Sometimes the statements and propaganda put forth by
oppressive regimes are more harmful to Islam and the Muslims than their actions and
policy, endangering the whole repute of Islam and the Muslims. God reproaches the
religious scholars, therefore, for failing to prevent the oppressors from uttering
dishonest words and spreading sinful propaganda. He says in effect: “Why did they
not denounce the man who falsely claimed to be God’s vicegerent on earth and the
instrument of His will, who claimed to be enforcing God’s laws in the right way and
to have a correct understanding and practice of Islamic justice, even though he was
incapable of comprehending what justice is? Claims like these are a form of sinful
talk that is extremely harmful to society. Why did the religious scholars not prevent
them from being made? The tyrants who uttered this nonsense talk and committed
treason and brought evil innovations306 into Islam; why did the religious scholars not
stand in their way and make them desist from these sins?
If someone interprets God’s ordinances in a way displeasing to Him, thus introducing
an evil innovation in Islam, or executes laws that are anti-Islamic, claiming to be
acting in accordance with the requirements of Islamic justice, it is the duty of the
religious scholars to proclaim their opposition. If they fail to do so, they will be cursed
by God, as is apparent both from the verse under discussion and from this tradition:


305
    The word awliyā—like the cognate wilāyat—has numerous different meanings. It is used here in the
general sense that can be deduced from Qur’an, 10:62-63: “Verily the friends (awliyā) of God—those
who believe and guard against evil—shall suffer no fear nor shall they grieve.”
306
    Evil innovation: bid‘at, a belief or practice not compatible with either the Qur’an or the Sunnah.


69                                                                            Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
“When evil innovations appear, it is the duty of the scholars to bring forth his
knowledge [by condemning them]; otherwise, God’s curse will be upon him.”
In such cases, the expression of opposition and the expounding of God’s teachings
and ordinances that stand in contradiction to innovation, oppression, and sin, are also
useful in themselves, for they make the masses aware of the corruption of society and
the wrongdoing of the treacherous, sinful, and irreligious rulers. The people will then
rise up in revolt and refuse to collaborate any longer with the tyrants or to obey
corrupt and treacherous ruling powers. The expression of opposition by religious
scholars is a form of “forbidding the evil” on the part of the religious leadership,
which creates in its wake a wave of broad opposition and “forbidding the evil” on the
part of all religiously inclined and honorable people. If the oppressive and deviant
rulers do not bow to the wishes of such an oppositional movement by returning to the
straight path of Islam and obedience to God’s laws, but attempt to silence it by force
of arms, they will, in effect, have engaged in armed aggression against the Muslims
and acquired the status of a rebellious group (fī’a bāghiya). It will then be the duty of
the Muslims to engage in an armed jihād against that ruling group in order to make
the policies of the ruling society and the norms of government conform to the
principles and ordinances of Islam.
It is true that at present, you do not have the power to prevent the innovative practices
of the rulers or to halt the corruption in which they are engaged. But at least do not
stay silent. If they strike you on head, cry out in protest! Do not submit to oppression;
such submission is worse than oppression itself. In order to counteract their press and
propaganda apparatus, we must create our own apparatus to refuse whatever lies they
issue and to proclaim that Islamic justice is not what they claim it is, but on the
contrary, has a complete and coherent program for ordering the affairs of the family
and all Muslim society. All these matters must be made clear so that people can come
to know the truth and coming generations will not take the silence of the religious
leaders as proof that the deeds and policies of the oppressors conform to the sharī‘ah,
and that the perspicacious religion of Islam allows them to “consume what is
forbidden,” or in other words, to plunder the wealth of the people.
Since the range of thought of some people is confined to the mosque we are now
sitting in and is incapable of extending any further, when they hear the expression
“consumption of what is forbidden,” they can only think of some corner grocer whose
is (God forbid) selling his customers short. They never think of the whole range of
more important forms of “consuming what is forbidden,” of plunder. Huge amounts
of capital are being swallowed up; our public funds are being embezzled; our oil is
being plundered; and our country is turned into a market for expensive, unnecessary
goods by the representatives of foreign companies, which makes it possible for
foreign capitalists and their local agents to pocket the people’s money. A number of
foreign states carry off our oil after drawing it out of the ground, and the negligible
sum they pay to the regime they have installed returns to their pockets by other routes.
As for the small amount that goes into the treasury, God only knows what it is spent
on. All of this is a form of “consumption of what is forbidden” that takes place on an
enormous scale, in fact on an international scale. It is not merely an evil, but a hideous
and most dangerous evil. Examine carefully the conditions of society and the actions
of the government and its component organs, and then you will understand what
hideous “consumption of what is forbidden” is taking place now. If an earthquake
occurs in some corners of the country, it too becomes a means for the ruling profiteers
to increase their illegal income: they fill their pockets with money that is supposed to
go to the victims of the earthquake. Whenever our oppressive, anti-national rulers


70                                                                   Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
enter into agreements with foreign states or companies, they pocket huge amounts of
our people’s money and lavish additional huge sums on their foreign masters. It is a
veritable flood of forbidden consumption that sweeps past us, right before our eyes.
All this is misappropriation of wealth goes on and on: in our foreign trade and in the
contracts made for the exploitation of our mineral wealth, the utilization of our forests
and other natural resources, construction work, road building, and the purchase of
arms from the imperialists, both Western and communist.
We must end all this plundering and usurpation of wealth. The people as a whole have
a responsibility in this respect, but the responsibility of the religious scholars is graver
and more critical. We must take the lead over other Muslims in embarking on this
sacred jihād, this heavy undertaking; because of our rank and position, we must be in
the forefront. If we do not have the power today to prevent these misdeeds from
happening and to punish these embezzlers and traitors, these powerful thieves that
rule over us, then we must work to gain that power. At the same time, to fulfill our
minimum obligation, we must not fail to expound the truth and expose the thievery
and mendacity of our rulers. When we come to power, we will not only put the
country’s political life, economy, and administration in order, we will also whip and
chastise the thieves and the liars.
They set fire to the Masjid al-Aqsā.307 We cry out: “Leave the Masjid al-Aqsā half-
burned to the ground; do not erase all traces of the crime!” But the Shāh’s regime
opens an account, sets up a fund, and starts collecting money from the people
supposedly to rebuilt the Masjid al-Aqsā, but really to fill the pockets of our rulers
while also covering up the crime committed by Israel.
These are the disasters that are afflicting the nation of Islam, and that have brought us
to our present state. Is it not duty of the scholars of Islam to speak out about all this?
“Why do their rabbis not forbid their consumption of what is forbidden”? why do our
Muslims scholars not protect? Why do they say nothing about all this plundering?
To return to the sermon of the Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a), he continues with a
reference to the verse: “Cursed are those among Children of Israel who have failed to
believe” (5:78). This is not relevant to our present discussion. Then he says: “God
reproached and blamed them [the rabbis] because they saw with their own eyes the
oppressors committing vile and corrupt acts but did not stop them.” According to the
Doyen of the Martyrs, their silence was due to two factors: greed and baseness. Either
they were covetous persons who profited materially from the oppressors, accepting
payment to keep quiet, or they were faint-hearted cowards who were afraid of them.
Consult the traditions referring to enjoining the good and forbidding the evil. There
the conduct of those who constantly invent excuses in order to escape from doing
their duty is condemned and their silence is considered shameful. “God says: ‘Do not
fear men, but fear Me’ (2:150). This verse means roughly: ‘Why do you fear men?
Our friends (awliyā) have given up their lives for the sake of Islam; you should be
prepared to do the same.’
“Elsewhere in the Qur’an God also says: “The believers, men and women, are friends
and protectors to each other; they enjoin the good and forbid the evil;…they establish
the prayer, pay the zakāt, and obey God and His Messenger’ (9:71). In this verse, God
mentions the duty of enjoining the good and forbidding the evil first because He
knows that if this duty is correctly performed, all other duties, whether easy or
difficult, will fall into place. For enjoining the good and forbidding the evil means
summoning men to Islam while at the same time remedying oppression, opposing the

307
      Masjid al-Aqsā: see n. 37 above.


71                                                                    Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
oppressor, making just distribution of the spoils of war, and levying and spending
taxes in just and due form.”
If the duty of enjoining the good and forbidding the evil is properly performed, all
other duties will automatically fall into place. If the good is enjoined and the evil
forbidden, the oppressors and their agents will be unable to usurp the people’s
property and dispose of it according to their own whims; they will be unable to
squander the taxes taken from the people. For he who enjoins the good and forbids the
evil actively calls men to Islam by remedying injustice and opposing the oppressor.
Enjoining the good and forbidding the evil has been made a duty primarily for the
sake of accomplishing these high aims. We have restricted it, however, to a narrow
category of affairs where harm is suffered chiefly by the individual who is guilty of a
sin by deed or by omission. We have the idea firmly in our heads that the instances of
evil we are called upon to combat (munkarāt) are only the things we encounter or hear
about in everyday life. For example, if someone plays music while we are riding on
the bus,308 or the owner of a coffee house does something wrong, or someone eats in
the middle of the bazaar during Ramadān,309 we regard all these things as instances of
evil we must denounce. Meanwhile, we remain totally oblivious to far greater evils.
Those who are destroying the welfare of Islam and trampling on the rights of the
weak---it is they whom we must force to desist from evil.
If a collective protest were made against the oppressors who commit an improper act
or crime, if several thousand telegrams were sent to them from all the Islamic
countries telling them to desist, to relinquish their errors, they certainly would desist.
If every time a step were taken or a speech given against the interests of Islam and the
welfare of the people, those responsible were condemned throughout the country, in
every single village and hamlet, they would be obliged to retreat. Could they possibly
do otherwise? Never! I know them; I know what kind of people they are. They are
very cowardly and would retreat very quickly. But if they see that we are more gutless
than they are, they will give themselves airs and do whatever they want.
When the ‘ulamā of Qum met and banded together on one occasion, and the provinces
supported them by sending delegations and delivering speeches to show their
solidarity, the regime retreated and canceled the measures we were objecting to.310
Afterwards, they were able to cool our enthusiasm and weaken us; they divided us up
and invented a separate “religious duty” for each of us. As a result of the differing
opinions that appeared among us, they grew bold again, and now they do whatever
they want with the Muslims and this Islamic country of ours.
The Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a) speaks of “summoning men to Islam while at the same
time remedying oppression and opposing the oppressors”; it is for the sake of these
great aims that enjoining the good and forbidding the evil has been made a duty. If
some poor grocer does something wrong, he has not harmed Islam, but only himself.

308
    Among the different schools of Islamic law, the Shī‘i School manifests the greatest disapproval of
music. Music in a public place is doubly reprehensible since it is an imposition on the unwilling
listener.
309
     There are certain circumstances that may dispense one from fasting during Ramadān, notably
illness, but out of respect for the sanctity of the month and the fasting of others, one must refrain from
eating in public.
310
    A reference to the agitation against the new laws on the election of local councils promulgated by
the Shāh’s regime on October 6, 1962. These laws no longer specified that candidates were to be
Muslim, and they were seen as a prelude to increased participation in public life by the Bahā’is and
eventual abolition of the Constitution of 1906. After a prolonged campaign against the laws, in which
Imām Khomeini took a prominent part, they were annulled by the government on November 28, 1962.
See S.H.R., Barrasī va Tahlīlī, pp. 142-187.


72                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
In performing our duty of enjoining the good and forbidding the evil, we must pay
closest attention to those who harm Islam and those who, under various pretexts,
plunder the people’s means of livelihood.
On occasion we read in the paper—sometimes it is stated humorously, sometimes
seriously—that many of the items collected for the victims of floods or earthquakes
are picked up by our rulers for their own use. One of the ‘ulamā of Malāyer told me
that the people had wanted to send a truckload of shrouds for the victims of some
disaster, but the police refused to let them through, and even tried to confiscate the
load! “Enjoining the good and forbidding the evil” is more imperative in such cases.
Now let me ask you, were the subjects mentioned by the Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a) in
his sermon addressed only to his companions who were gathered around him listening
to his words? Does not the phrase “O people, take heed” address us too? Are we not
included in “people”? Should we not profit from this address of the Doyen of the
Martyrs (‘a)?
As I stated at the beginning of this discussion, the subjects contained in the sermon of
the Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a) were not intended for a single group or class. His
address was more in the nature of a circular directed to all commanders, ministers,
rulers, fuqahā—and in short, to the whole world, particularly those who are alive and
fully conscious. The circulars he issued belong together with the Qur’an in the sense
that they demand our obedience until the Day of Resurrection. The verse referred to in
the address speaks only of the Jewish scholars and rabbis, but its purport is universal.
The Jewish scholars and rabbis were condemned by God because fear or covetousness
made them keep silent in the face of the misdeeds of the oppressors, whereas if they
had spoken or cried out in protest, they could have prevented oppression from
occurring. If the ‘ulamā of Islam likewise fail to rise up against the oppressors and
remain silent instead, they too will be condemned.
After addressing the people in general, the Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a) then turns to a
particular group, the ‘ulamā of Islam, and tells them: “You enjoy prestige and
standing in society; the nation of Islam respects and venerates you. You are held in
awe and have high standing in society because you are expected to rise up against the
oppressors in defense of the truth and to compel the oppressor to enforce the rights of
the oppressed. Men have placed their hopes in you for the establishment of justice and
the prevention of transgression by the oppressors.
“Thus you have reached a certain station and rank. But you have failed to perform the
duties of your station. If some harm were to befall the father of one of you, or if—God
forbid—someone were to insult him, you would be greatly distressed and would cry
out in protest. But now that God’s covenants are being violated before your very eyes
and Islam is being dishonored, you keep silent and are not distressed even in your
hearts for if you were distressed, you would be bound to raise your voices in protest.
The blind, the dumb, and the poverty-stricken cultivators of the land are being
destroyed and nobody shows any concern; no one is concerned for the wretched,
barefooted people.”
Do you imagine all that bombastic propaganda being broadcast on the radio is true?
Go and see for yourselves at first hand what state our people are living in. Not even
one, out of two hundred villages has a clinic. No one is concerned about the poor and
the hungry, and they do not allow the measures Islam has devised for the sake of the
poor to be implemented. Islam has solved the problem of poverty and inscribed it at
the very top of its program: “Sadaqāt is for the poor.”311 Islam is aware that first, the

311
      Qur’an, 9:60.


73                                                                  Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
conditions of the poor must be remedied; the conditions of the deprived must be
remedied. But they do not allow the plans of Islam to be implemented.
Our wretched people subsist in conditions of poverty and hunger, while the taxes that
the ruling class extorts from them are squandered. They buy Phantom jets so that
pilots from Israel and its agents can come and train in them in our country.312 So
extensive is the influence of Israel in our country—Israel, which is in a state of war
with the Muslims, so that those who support it are likewise in a state of war with the
Muslims—and so great is the support the regime gives it, that Israeli soldiers come to
our country for training! Our country has become a base for them! The markets of our
country are also in their hands. If matters go on this way, and the Muslims continue to
be apathetic, the Muslims will lose all say in the commercial life of the country.
To return to the address of the Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a): “You have not made proper
use of your station. Not only you do nothing yourselves; you fail to support the person
who does want to do his duty. The only source of concern and satisfaction for you is
that you have the support and respect of the oppressor, that he addresses you as
‘Noble Shaykh’! What the nation suffers at the hands of the government is of no
concern to you. The disaster that has befallen you is greater than what has befallen
others for the true rank and degree of ‘ulamā has been taken away from you. The
administration of affairs and the implementation of law ought to be undertaken by
those who are knowledgeable concerning God and are trustees of God’s ordinances
concerning what is permitted and what is forbidden. But that rank has been taken
away from you.”
The Imām (‘a) could have said at this point: “What is my right has been taken away
from me, but you have not come to my aid,” or, “The rights of Imāms have been taken
away, but you have kept silent.” Instead, he spoke of those “knowledgeable
concerning God” (al-‘ulamā bi-’llāh), meaning the religious scholars (rabbāniyūn) or
leaders. Here he is not referring to the philosophers or mystics, for the person
knowledgeable concerning God is the one who is learned in God’s ordinances. It is
such a person who is designated as a religious scholar (rūhāni or rabbāni), naturally
on condition that spirituality (rūhāniyyat) and orientation to God Almighty be fully
apparent in him.
The Imām went on: “But your position has been usurped from you, for no other
reason but that you have abandoned the pivot of truth and have disagreed about the
nature of the Sunnah, despite the existence of clear proofs. But if you were to show
strength in the face of hardship and suffering for God’s sake, then the conduct of
affairs, as willed by God, would be restored to you; command and authority would be
yours.”
If you were to act correctly and perform your duty, you would see that the conduct of
affairs would be bound over to you. If the form of government willed by Islam were
to come into being, none of the governments now existing in the world would be able
to resist it; they would all capitulate. But unfortunately, we have failed to establish
such a government. Even in the earliest age of Islam, its opponents hindered its
establishment and prevented governments from being entrusted to the person chosen
by God and His Messenger precisely in order to prevent what has happened.


312
   One indication of the close ties existing with Israel was the regular contacts that took place between
Iranian generals and high-ranking members of the Zionist armed forces. For example, General Palizban
met in Occupied Palestine with Moshe Dayan and Arik Sharon, most probably in 1974. Photographs of
the meeting, showing all participants with cordial smiles, were discovered after the Revolution and
published in the newspaper Jumhūrī-yi Islāmī on Shahrīvar 26, 1359/September 17, 1980.


74                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
“You allowed the oppressors to take away your functions.” When you failed to
perform your duties and abandoned the task of government, it became possible for the
oppressors to take over the position that was legitimately yours. “You allowed the
affairs of God to fall into their hands, so they came to conduct them on the basis of
their suppositions and arbitrary desires. What enabled them to win this control was
your panic-stricken flight from being killed, and your attachment to the life of this
world. You have delivered the powerless into their clutches, so that some of the
people are now subjugated like slaves and others are deprived of even their
livelihood.” All of this applies to the age we live in; in fact, it applies more fully to the
present than to the time of the Imām (‘a). “The rulers are entirely absorbed in the
pleasures of kingship, earning shame and disgrace for themselves with their
licentiousness, following evil counselors, and showing impudence toward God. One
of their appointed spokesmen mounts the minbar in each city to tell lies.” In those
days preachers would praise the oppressors from the minbar. Today, radio stations fill
the air with propaganda on their behalf and maliciously misrepresent the ordinances
of Islam.
“The earth is defenseless against them.” Now, too, the oppressors can freely exploit
the earth, without any obstruction; there is no one to stand in their way. “They grab
freely whatever they want [of the earth]. The people are their slaves and are powerless
to defend themselves. One ruler is an obstinate tyrant, while another represses his
wretched subjects ruthlessly, and still another refuses in his absolutism to recognize
God as the beginning and end of all things. Is it not strange—how could one not think
it strange—that the world is in the clutches of cunning tyrants, oppressive tax
collectors, and governors who have no compassion for the believers under their rule?
“It is God Who will judge concerning what is at dispute among us, and deliver a
decisive verdict concerning all that occurs among us.
“O God! You know that everything we did was not prompted by rivalry for political
power, nor by desire for the chattels of this world. Rather, it was done in order to
demonstrate the signs of Your religion, to reform the affairs of your land, to protect
the oppressed among Your servants, and to act in accordance with the duties, norms,
and ordinances You have established.
“So, O scholars of religion! Help us reach our goal and obtain our rights. The
oppressors will wax strong in their efforts against you and will attempt to put out the
light kindled by your Beloved [the Prophet]. But God suffices us; upon Him do we
rely, to Him we do turn, and to Him is our journeying.”
As we said, the entire address from beginning to end is addressed to the ‘ulamā. There
is no indication that the person intended by the expression “those knowledgeable
about God” are the Imāms (‘a). They are the scholars of Islam, the rabbāniyyūn. The
designation rabbāni refers to one who believes in God, fulfills God’s ordinances, and
is knowledgeable concerning those ordinances, as a trustee of God’s decrees
concerning what is permitted and what is forbidden.
When the Imām (‘a) said that the conduct of affairs belongs to the ‘ulamā, he did not
mean to restrict this function to a period of ten or twenty years, or simply to the city
and people of Medina. It is apparent from the whole speech that his meaning was
more universal, that he had in mind a vast community that would undertake the
establishment of justice.
If the ‘ulamā who are the trustees of God’s decrees concerning what is permitted and
what is forbidden, and who possess the two characteristics of knowledge and justice
as set forth above—if they were to implement God’s ordinances, to execute the penal
provisions of the law, and generally to conduct and administer the affairs of the


75                                                                     Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
Muslims, the people would no longer be hungry and wretched and the laws of Islam
would no longer be in abeyance.
The tradition containing this noble speech, then, is part of the evidence supporting our
thesis, the governance of the faqīh. Were its chain of transmission not weak, we could
cite it as a direct proof. Even as it stands, we might say that the content of the
tradition, being veracious, bears witness that it was uttered by one of the ma‘sūmīn.313
We have now completed our discussion of the governance of the faqīh; we have
nothing further to say on the subject. There is no need to go into details such as the
manner in which zakāt is to be collected or spent, or how the penal provisions of the
law are to be implemented. We have set forth the main principles of the subject and
shown that the same governance that was exercised by the Most Noble Messenger (s),
and by the Imāms (‘a), is also the prerogative of the fuqahā. There can be no doubt
about this. If there is any evidence, however, that in certain specific cases the faqīh
does not possess the same right of governance, we naturally exclude such cases from
the operation of the general rule.
As I stated previously, the subject of the governance of faqīh is not something new
that I have invented; since the very beginning, it has been mentioned continually.
The ruling given by the late Mīrzā Hasan Shirāzi314 prohibiting the use of tobacco was
in effect a governmental ruling; hence all other fuqahā were obliged to follow it, and
indeed the great ‘ulamā of Iran did follow it, with only a few exceptions. It was not a
judicial ruling on a matter being disputed by a few individuals, based purely on his
own determination. It was instead a governmental ruling based on the interests of
Islam and the Muslims and his determination of a secondary consideration (‘unvān-i-
sanavi).315 As long as this secondary consideration obtained, the ruling retained its
validity, and when the consideration no longer applied, the decree also ceased to
apply.
Again, when Mīrzā Muhammad Taqi Shirāzi316 gave orders for jihād—or “defense,”
they called it—all the ‘ulamā obeyed, because his order was a governmental ruling.
It is related that the late Kāshif al-Ghitā317 also used to expound much of what I have
said. Among other modern scholars, the late Narāqi also was of the opinion that the
fuqahā are entitled to exercise all the worldly functions of the Most Noble Messenger


313
    Ma‘sūmīn: those possessing the quality of ‘ismat (see n. 67 above); i.e., the Prophet, Fātimah, and
the Twelve Imāms. See A Brief History of the Fourteen Infallibles (Tehran: WOFIS); Sayyid Murtadā
al-‘Askari, The Twelve Successors of the Holy Prophet (s) [Pub.]
314
    Mīrzā Hasan Shirāzi: a mujtahid, d. 1312/1894. After the production and marketing of tobacco in
Iran had been made the monopoly of a British company, he declared in December 1891 that “the use of
tobacco is tantamount to war against the Imām of the Age.” In obedience to his declaration, all of Iran
boycotted tobacco, forcing the cancellation of the concession in early 1892. See Algar, Religion and
State, pp. 205-215.
315
    “Secondary consideration”: ‘unvān-i sanavi, a contingent circumstance of legal significance.
Tobacco as a substance was religiously unobjectionable; it was the circumstance of the British
monopoly that furnished the legal grounds for its prohibition.
316
    Mīrzā Muhammad Taqi Shirāzi: a pupil of Mīrzā Hasan and an important Shī‘ah scholar, d.
1338/1921. He was a leading force in the resistance by the Shī‘ah ‘ulamā opposed to the imposition of
British rule on Iraq at the end of World War I. See Muhammad Hirz ad-Dīn, Ma‘ārif ar-Rijāl (Najaf,
1384/1964), II, 215-218.
317
    Kāshif al-Ghitā: more fully, Muhammad Husayn Kāshif al-Ghitā, a leading Shī‘ah scholar of Iraq,
1295/1876-1373-1954. He was active politically as well as academically throughout his life. See the
biographical introduction to his Asl ash-Shī‘ah wa Usūluhā, 7th ed. (Beirut, 1377/1957), pp. 7-21. The
book is translated into English as The Origin of Shī‘ite Islam and Its Principles (Qum: Ansariyan
Publications). [Pub.]


76                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
(s). The late Nā’ini also believed that the doctrine of the governance of the faqīh may
be deduced from the maqbūla of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah.318
In any case, this subject is by no means new. I have simply examined it at greater
length with reference to the different branches of government, to give the subject
greater clarity for my listeners. In accordance with the commands of God Almighty,
as expressed in His Book and by the tongue of His Most Noble Messenger (s), I have
also set forth certain matters of importance to the present age.
We have stressed the main principles of the subject. Now it is up to the present and
future generation to discuss it further and reflect upon it, and to find a way to translate
it into reality, eschewing all forms of apathy, weakness and despair. God Almighty
willing, by means of mutual consultation and the exchange of views, they will
develop a method for establishing an Islamic government with all its various branches
and departments. They will entrust the affairs of government to persons who are
honest, intelligent, believing, and competent and remove traitors from the control of
the government, the homeland, and the treasury of the Muslims. Let them be assured
that God Almighty is with them.




318
      See p. 79.


77                                                                    Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
      PROGRAM FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT
         OF AN ISLAMIC GOVERNMENT

IT IS OUR DUTY TO WORK toward the establishment of an Islamic government.
The first activity we must undertake in this respect is the propagation of our case; that
is how we must begin.
        It has always been that way, all over the world: a group of people came
together, deliberated, made decisions, and then began to propagate their aims.
Gradually, the number of like-minded people would increase, until finally they
became powerful enough to influence a great state or even to confront and overthrow
it, as was the case with the downfall of Muhammad ‘Ali Mīrzā and the supplanting of
his absolute monarchy with constitutional government.319 Such movements began
with no troops or armed power at their disposal; they always had to resort to
propagating the aims of their movement first. The thievery and tyranny practiced by
the regime would be condemned and the people awakened and made to understand
that the thievery inflicted on them was wrong. Gradually, the scope of this activity
would be expanded until it came to embrace all groups of society, and the people,
awakened and active, would attain their goal.
You have neither a country nor an army now, but propagating activity is possible for
you, because the enemy has been unable to deprive you of all the required means.
You teach the people matters relating to worship, of course, but more important are
the political, economic, and legal aspects of Islam. These are, or should be, the focus
of our concern. It is our duty to begin exerting ourselves now in order to establish a
truly Islamic government. We must propagate our cause to the people, instruct them in
it, and convince them of its validity. We must generate a wave of intellectual
awakening, to emerge as a current throughout society, and gradually, to take shape as
organized Islamic movement made up of the awakened, committed, and religious
masses who will rise up and establish an Islamic government.
Propagation and instruction, then, are our two fundamental and most important
activities. It is the duty of the fuqahā to promulgate religion and instruct the people in
the creed, ordinances, and institutions of Islam, in order to pave the way in society for
the implementation of Islamic law and the establishment of Islamic institutions. In one
of the traditions we have cited, you will have noticed that the successors of the Most
Noble Messenger (s) are described as “teaching the people”—that is, instructing them
in religion.
This duty is particularly important under the present circumstances, for the
imperialists, the oppressive and treacherous rulers, the Jews, Christians, and
materialists are all attempting to distort the truths of Islam and lead the Muslims
astray. Our responsibilities of propagation and instruction are greater than ever before.
We see today that the Jews (may God curse them) have meddled with the text of the
Qur’an and have made certain changes in the Qur’ans they have printed in the


319
    On June 23, 1908, Muhammad ‘Ali Shāh carried out with Russian aid a military coup against the
first Iranian Majlis. He was overthrown and constitutional rule restored on July 16, 1909, as a result of
popular resistance, largely directed by the most important religious scholars of the day in Najaf. See
Browne, The Persian Revolution of 1905-1909, chs. 7-10.


78                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
occupied territories.320 It is our duty to prevent this treacherous interference with the
text of Qur’an. We must protest and make the people aware that the Jews and their
foreign backers are opposed to the very foundations of Islam and wish to establish
Jewish domination throughout the world. Since they are a cunning and resourceful
group of people, I fear that —God forbid— they may one day achieve their goal, and
that the apathy shown by some of us may allow a Jew to rule over us one day. May
God never let us see such a day!
At the same time, a number of orientalists serving as propaganda agents for the
imperialist institution are also active in endeavors to distort and misrepresent the
truths of Islam. The agents of imperialism are busy in every corner of the Islamic
world drawing our youth from us with their evil propaganda. They are not converting
them into Jews and Christians; they are corrupting them, making them irreligious and
indifferent, which is sufficient for their purposes. In our own city of Tehran now there
are centers of evil propaganda run by the churches, the Zionists, and the Bahā’is in
order to lead our people astray and make them abandon the ordinances and teachings
of Islam. Do we not have a duty to destroy these centers that are damaging Islam? Is it
enough for us simply to possess Najaf? (Actually, we do not even have Najaf!)321
Should we be content to sit lamenting in Qum, or should we come to life and be
active?
You, the younger generation in the religious institution, must come fully to life and
keep the command of God alive. Develop and refine your thinking, and lay aside your
concern with the minutiae and subtleties of the religious sciences, because that kind of
concentration on petty detail has kept many of us from performing our more important
duties. Come to the aid of Islam; save Islam! They are destroying Islam! Invoking the
laws of Islam and the name of the Most Noble Messenger (s), they are destroying
Islam! Agents—both foreigners sent by the imperialists and natives employed by
them—have spread out into every village and region of Iran and are leading our
children and young people astray, who might otherwise be of service to Islam one
day. Help save our young people from this danger!
It is your duty to disseminate among the people the religious knowledge you have
acquired and to acquaint them with the subjects you have learned. The scholar or the
faqīh is accorded praise and glorified in the traditions because he is the one who
makes the ordinances, doctrines, and institutions of Islam known to the people and
instructs them in the Sunnah of the Most Noble Messenger (s). You must now devote
your energies to the tasks of propagation and instruction in order to present Islam
more fully to the people.
It is our duty to dispel the doubts about Islam that have been created; until we have
erased these doubts from people’s minds, we will not be able to accomplish anything.
We must impress upon ourselves and upon the generation—and even the generation
after that—the necessity for dispelling these doubts about Islam that have arisen in the

320
    Soon after the Six-Day War, it was reported that copies of the Qur’an were circulating in the
territories seized by the Zionists, as well as in African countries, from which all verses critical of the
Jews had been excised.
321
    Najaf is the main center of learning in the Shī‘i world. The lament here that “we do not even have
Najaf” refers to the restrictions and pressure placed on the Shī‘ah scholars of Najaf by the Ba‘athist
regime of Baghdad. The Ba‘athist persecution of Najaf reached a highpoint in May 1969—ten months
before these lectures were given—when a number of ‘ulamā were arrested and tortured and religious
endowments were confiscated. See anon., Hayāt-e-Kareem, in Eng. (Karachi, 1973), pp. 73-84. After
the victory of the Islamic Revolution in Iran, the crime of the regime in Baghdad was epitomized by
torturing and cold-bloodedly murdering Āyatullāh al-‘Uzma Sayyid Muhammad al-Bāqir as-Sadr and
his sister Bint al-Hudā in April 1980. [Pub.]


79                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
minds of many people, even the educated among us, as the result of centuries of false
propaganda. You must acquaint the people with the worldview, social institution, and
form of government proposed by Islam, so that they may come to know what Islam is
and what its laws are.
It is the duty of the teaching institution today in Qum, Mashhad, and elsewhere to
propagate Islam, to expound this faith and school of thought. In addition to Islam, you
must make yourselves known to the people of the world and also authentic models of
Islamic leadership and government. You must address yourselves to the university
people in particular, the educated class. The students have had their eyes opened. I
assure you that if you present Islam and Islamic government to the universities
accurately, the students will welcome it and accept it. The students are opposed to
tyranny; they are opposed to the puppet regimes imperialism imposes; they are
opposed to thievery and the plundering of public wealth; they are opposed to this
consumption of what is forbidden and this deceitful propaganda. But no student could
be opposed to Islam, whose form of government and teachings are beneficial to
society. The students are looking to Najaf, appealing for help. Should we sit idle,
waiting for them to enjoin the good upon us and call us to our duties?322 Our young
people studying in Europe are enjoining the good upon us; say to us: “We have
organized Islamic associations; now help us!”323
It is our duty to bring all these matters to the attention of the people. We must explain
what the form of government is in Islam and how rule was conducted in the earliest
days of Islamic history. We must tell them how the center of command and the seat of
the judiciary under it were both located in part of the mosque, at a time when the
Islamic state embraced the farthest reaches of Iran, Egypt, the Hijaz, and the Yemen.
Unfortunately, when government passed into the hands of the next generations, it was
converted into a monarchy, or even worse than a monarchy.
The people must be instructed in these matters and helped to mature, intellectually
and politically. We must tell them what kind of government we want, what kinds of
people would assume responsibility for affairs in the government we propose, and
what policies and programs they would follow. The ruler in Islamic society is a person
who treats his brother ‘Aqil324 in such a way that he would never request extra support
from the public treasury (lest there be economic discrimination among the Muslims),
and who requires to account for the guaranteed loan she has obtained from the public
treasury, telling her, “If you do not pay back this loan, you will be the be the first
woman of the Bani Hāshim325 to have her hand cut off.” That is the kind of ruler and
leader we want, a leader who will put the law into practice instead of his personal
desires and inclinations; who will treat all members of the community as equals
before the law; who will refuse to countenance privilege or discrimination in any
form; who will place his own family on an equal footing with the rest of the people;

322
    Insofar as the “enjoining of the good” is the particular duty of the religious scholars, it would be
shaming for them to need a reminder from students.
323
    Throughout his exile in Najaf, Imām Khomeini gave special attention to the Islamic associations of
Iranian students in Europe and the United States, sending them guidance and encouragement. For an
example of his messages to the Iranian Muslim students in North America, see Islam and Revolution,
pp. 209-211.
324
    ‘Āqil ibn Abi Tālib: brother of Imām ‘Ali. After Imām ‘Ali assumed the caliphate, ‘Aqil is related to
have asked him to withdraw 40,000 dirhams from the public treasury to enable him to settle a debt.
When his request was denied, ‘Aqil abandoned his brother and joined the camp of Mu‘āwiyah in
Damascus.
325
    Bani Hāshim: the Meccan clan to which the Prophet and his descendants belonged. See Subhāni,
chap. 4, “Ancestors of the Prophet,” [Pub.]


80                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
who will cut off the hand of his own son if he commits a theft; who will execute his
own brother and sister if they sell heroin (not execute people for possession of ten
grams of heroin when his own relative operate gangs that bring into the country
heroin by the hundred-weight).326
Many of the ordinances of Islam that refer to worship also pertain to social and
political functions. The forms of worship practiced in Islam are usually linked to
politics and the gestation of society. For example, congregational prayer, the
gathering on the occasion of hajj, and Friday prayer, for all their spirituality, exert a
political as well as moral and doctrinal influence. Islam has provided for such
gatherings so that religious use might be made of them; so that feelings of
brotherhood and cooperation may be strengthened, intellectual maturity fostered,
solutions found for political and social problems, with jihād and collective effort as
the natural outcome.
In non-Islamic countries, or Islamic countries ruled by non-Islamic governments,
whenever they want the people to assemble like this, millions must be spent out of the
national treasury or budget, and even then the result is unsatisfactory; such meetings
lack spontaneity and spirit and are of no real consequence. In Islam, however, anyone
who wishes to perform the hājj departs of his own will and goes on the hājj. Also
people go eagerly to take part in congregational prayer. We must take advantage of
these assemblies to propagate and teach religion and to develop the ideological and
political movement of Islam.
Some people are completely unaware of this; they are only concerned about the
correct pronunciation of “wa lā ’dh-dhāllin.”327 When they go on the hājj, instead of
exchanging ideas with their Muslim brothers, propagating the beliefs and ordinances
of Islam, and seeking solutions to the universal problems and afflictions of the
Muslims (for example, rallying to liberate Palestine, which is part of the Islamic
homeland)—instead of doing all this, they exacerbate the differences that exist among
Muslims. The first Muslims, on the other hand, used to accomplish important business
on the occasion of hājj or at their Friday gatherings. The Friday sermon was more
than a sūrah from the Qur’an and a prayer followed by a few brief words. Entire
armies used to be mobilized by Friday sermon and proceed directly from the mosque
to the battlefield—and a man who sets out from the mosque to go into battle will fear
only God, not poverty, hardship, or his army will be victorious and triumphant. When
you look at the Friday sermons given in that age and the sermons of the Commander
of the Faithful (‘a), you see that their purpose was to set people in motion, to arouse
them to fight and sacrifice themselves for Islam, to resolve the sufferings of the
people of this world.
If the Muslims before us had gathered every Friday and reminded themselves of their
common problems, and solved them or resolved to solve them, we would not be in the
position we find ourselves in today. Today we must start organizing these assemblies
in earnest and make use of them for the sake of propagation and instruction. The


326
    An allusion to the activities of Ashraf, the Shāh’s twin sister, who was reported in 1960 to have been
detained by the Swiss police after large quantities of heroin were found in her possession. See Bahman
Nīrūmand, Persien, Modell eines Entwicklungslandes (Hamburg, 1967), pp. 133-134.
327
    Wa lā ’adh-Dhāllīn: “not those who go astray,” a phrase occurring in the seventh verse of the
opening chapter of the Qur’an that is recited in every prayer. The letter dh (‫ )ض‬in ’dh-dhāllīn
represents an Arabic sound that does not exist in Persian and it is generally pronounced by Persian
speakers as a z. Nonetheless, there are those—in Iran and elsewhere—who devote excessive energy to
the task of giving the letter its Arabic value when reciting the verse in prayer.


81                                                                               Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
ideological and political movement of Islam will thus develop and advance toward its
climax.
Make Islam known to the people, then, and in so doing, create something akin to
‘Āshūrā.328 Just as we have steadfastly preserved the awareness of ‘Āshūrā (peace be
upon its founder) and not let it be lost, so that people still gather during Muharram and
beat their breasts, we should now take measures to create a wave of protest against the
state of the government; let the people gather, and the preachers and rawzakhwāns329
firmly fix the issue of government in their minds.
If you present Islam accurately and acquaint people with its worldview, doctrines,
principles, ordinances, and social system, they will welcome it ardently (God knows,
many people want it). I have witnessed that myself. A single word was enough once
to cause a wave of enthusiasm among the people, because then, like now, they were
all dissatisfied and unhappy with the state of affairs. They are living now in the
shadow of the bayonet, and repression will let them say nothing. They want someone
to stand up fearlessly and speak out. So, courageous sons of Islam, stand up! Address
the people bravely; tell the truth about our situation to the masses in simple language;
arouse them to enthusiastic activity, and turn the people in the street and the bazaar,
our simple-hearted workers and peasants, and our alert students into dedicated
mujāhids.330 The entire population will become mujāhids. All segments of society are
ready to struggle for the sake of freedom, independence, and the happiness of the
nation, and their struggle needs religion. Give the people Islam, then, for Islam is the
school of jihād, the religion of struggle; let them amend their characters and beliefs in
accordance with Islam and transform themselves into a powerful force, so that they
may overthrow the tyrannical regime imperialism has imposed on us and set up an
Islamic government.
Only those fuqahā who make people acquainted with the beliefs and institutions of
Islam, and who defend and protect them, are truly “citadels of Islam.”331 They must
deliver rousing, impassioned speeches and lead the people in order to fulfill this
function. Only then, if they live to be, say, 120, will the people feel that Islam has
suffered a misfortune with their passing away and that a gap has appeared in the
Muslim community, or as the tradition puts it, “A crack will appear in the fortress of
Islam.” Will some irremediable deficiency occur in Islamic society now if one of us
dies after spending his life at home reading books? What loss could our death mean?
But when Islam lost Imām Husayn (‘a), then indeed the loss was irreparable. A loss
occurs with the death of people who have preserved the doctrines, laws, and social
institutions of Islam, like Khwājah Nāsir ad-Dīn Tūsi332 or ‘Allāmah Hilli.333 But


328
    ‘Āshūrā: the tenth day of Muharram; the day on which Imām Husayn was martyred in Karbala. See
n. 11 above.
329
    Rauzakwāns: those who specialize in reciting narrations, often versified, of the martyrdom of the
Imāms. The first part of the designation, rauza, is taken from the title of one such narrative, Rauzat
ash-Shuhadā, by Husayn Vā‘iz Khāshifi (d. 910/1504).
330
    Mujāhid: those who engage in jihād, who struggle for the attainment of God’s purposes on earth.
331
    “Citadels of Islam”: see the tradition cited on p. 58.
332
    Khwāja Nāsir ad-Dīn Tūsi: one of the most outstanding of all Shī‘ah scholars, 597/1201-672/1274.
He wrote voluminously not only on the religious sciences, but also on philosophy, mathematics, and
astronomy. He joined the entourage of the Mongol conqueror Hulagu when he was passing through
Iran on his way to Baghdad, a circumstance that has led many to accuse him of complicity in the
conquest. Concerning his associations with the Mongols, see A.H. Hā’iri, “Nāsir ad-Dīn Tūsi: His
Alleged Role in the Fall of Baghdad,” Actes du Ve Congress international d’Arabisants et
d’Islamisants (Brussels, 1971), pp. 255-266.


82                                                                            Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
what have you or I done for Islam that our passing should remind men of that
tradition? If a thousand of us were to die, nothing would happen. The only
explanation for this is that either we are not true fuqahā or we are not true believers.
No reasonable person expects our activities of propagation and instruction to lead
quickly to the formation of an Islamic government. In order to succeed in establishing
an Islamic government, we must have several kinds of continuous activities. Ours is a
goal that will take time to achieve. Sensible people in this world lay one stone in
position on the ground in the hope that someone two hundred years later will come to
finish a building mounted upon it so that the goal will finally be reached. Once the
caliph said to an old man who was planting a walnut tree: “Old man! Why plant this
walnut tree, which will not bear fruit until fifty years from now, by which time you
will be dead?” The man replied: “Others planted so that we might eat. We are
planting so that others may eat.”
We must preserve in our efforts even though they may not yield their result until the
next generation, for our service is devoted to Islam and the cause of human happiness.
If it were for a personal cause, we might say: “Why trouble ourselves! Our efforts
cannot benefit us, but only those who come later.” If the Doyen of the Martyrs (‘a),
who risked and indeed sacrificed all his material interests, had thought that way,
acting only for himself and his personal benefits, he would have compromised with
Yazīd334 at the very beginning and settled the whole affair—the Umayyad rulers were
only too anxious for him to swear allegiance to them and accept them as rulers. What
could have been better for them than to have the grandson of the Prophet (s), the
Imām of the Age, call them “Commander of the Faithful” and recognize their rule?
But his concern was the future of Islam and the Muslims. So that Islam might be
propagated among men in the future, and its political and social order established in
society, he opposed the Umayyads, fought against them, and ultimately sacrificed
himself.
Examine carefully one of the traditions I have cited above. You will see that Imām as-
Sādiq (‘a) was subjected to pressure by oppressive rulers and therefore chose
taqiyyah. He had no executive power, and most of the time he was confined under
surveillance. Nevertheless, he kept informing the Muslims of their duties and
appointing judges for them. What was the reason for this, and what benefit was there
in appointing and dismissing judges?
Great men, with broad horizons of thought, never despair or pay attention to the
circumstances in which they find themselves—imprisonment or captivity, for
example, which may continue indefinitely; instead, they continue making plans for the
advancement of their cause. Either they will carry out their plans themselves, or if
they are not granted the opportunity, others will follow their plans, even if it is two or
three hundred years later. The foundations of many great movements in history were
laid in this way. Sukarno, the former president of Indonesia, conceived and drew up
his plans in prison and later put them into practice.
Imām as-Sādiq (‘a) not only laid down plans; he also made appointments to certain
posts. If his appointments had been intended for that time, naturally they would have
been pointless, but in reality, he was thinking of the future. He was not like us,
thinking only of ourselves and concerned with our personal predicaments; he was
concerned with the ummah, with humanity as a whole, and he wished to reform

333
    ‘Allāmah Hilli: more fully, ‘Allāmah ibn al-Mutahhar al-Hilli, another important Shī‘ah scholar who
lived in the period of Mongol domination of Iran, 648/1250-716/1325. Concerning his scholarly and
political activities, see Michel Mazzaoui, The Rise of the Safawids (Wiesbaden, 1972), pp. 27-34.
334
    Yazid: second Umayyad caliph and adversary of Imām Husayn. He ruled from 60/680-64/683.


83                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
mankind by implementing the laws of justice. Thus, more than a thousand years ago,
he had to lay down a pattern of government and make his appointments, so that on the
day when the nations awoke and the Muslims came to their senses, there would be no
confusion and the form of Islamic government and its leadership would be known.
Generally speaking, Islam, and the Shī‘i school of thought, and indeed, all religions
and schools of thought have advanced and progressed in this fashion. They all started
with nothing but a plan, which came to fruition later because of the fortitude and
dedication of the respective leaders and prophets.
Moses was a mere shepherd, and for years he followed that calling. When he was
summoned to do battle with the pharaoh, he had no supporter or helper. But as a result
of his innate ability and his steadfastness, he overthrew the rule of the pharaoh with a
staff. Now imagine that staff in the hands of you or me would we have been able to
achieve the same result? It takes the determination, seriousness, and resourcefulness
of a Moses to make that staff capable of overthrowing a pharaoh; not everyone can
perform such a feat.
When the Most Noble Messenger (s) was given his prophetic mission and began to
propagate his massage, an eight-year old child (the Commander of the Faithful, upon
whom be peace) and a forty-year old woman (his wife Khadījah) were the only people
who believed in him; he had no one else. Everyone knows of the vexations that
plagued the Prophet, the obstacles that were placed in his way, the oppositions that he
faced. Yet he never despaired or said, “I am all alone.” He persisted and, with his
spiritual power and firm resolve, was able to advance his cause from nothing to the
point it has reached today, where seven hundred million people are gathered under his
banner.
The Shī‘i school of thought also began from zero. On the day that the Most Noble
Messenger (s) laid its foundations, he was greeted with mockery. He invited people to
his house and told them, “The man who possesses such-and-such qualities is to be my
minister,” meaning the Commander of the Faithful (‘a). At the time, the Commander
of the Faithful had not yet reached adulthood, although he always possessed a great
spirit, the greatest in the world. But no one rose to pay him respect, and some one
even turned to Abū Tālib335 and said to him in jest, “You are to march under the
banner of your son now!”
Also on the day of the Prophet’s announcement to the people that the Commander of
the Faithful (‘a) was to succeed him and govern, some expressed apparent admiration
and satisfaction, but the opposition to him began on that very day and continued down
to the end. If the Most Noble Messenger (s), had appointed him only as an authority to
be consulted on legal problems, there would have been no opposition to him. Since he
assigned him the rank of successor, however, and said that he was to rule over
Muslims and be entrusted with the destiny of the Islamic nation, various sorts of
discontent and opposition arose. If you, too, were to sit at home today, and not
intervene in the affairs of the country, no one would disturb you. They trouble you
only when you try to intervene in the destiny of the nation. It was because they
intervened in the affairs of government and the country that the Commander of the
Faithful and his followers were harassed and persecuted. But they did not abandon
their activity and their struggle, with the result that today, thanks to their labors, there
are about two hundred million Shī‘ah in the world.


335
   Abū Tālib: father of Imām ‘Ali. According to Shī‘i belief, he embraced Islam; but according to
Sunni belief, he did not. For a discussion of his faith in Islam, see Subhāni, op. cit., chap. 21, “Death of
Abū Tālib,” Islam of Abū Tālib (Part I-IV) [Pub.]


84                                                                                 Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
To present Islam properly to the people, the religious teaching institutions must be
reformed. The syllabi and methods of propagation and instruction must be improved;
apathy, laziness, despair, and lack of self-confidence must be replaced by diligence,
endeavor, hope and self-confidence; the effects left on the minds of some people by
foreigners’ insinuating propaganda must be erased; the attitudes of the pseudo-saintly
persons, who, despite their position within the teaching institution, make it difficult
for people to gain a true appreciation of Islam and the necessity for social reforms,
must be changed; and the court-affiliated ākhūnds,336 who have sold their religion for
worldly gain, must be divested of their garb and expelled from the religious
institution.
The agents of imperialism, together with the educational and political apparatuses of
the anti-national puppet governments they have installed, have been spreading poison
for centuries and corrupting the minds and morals of the people. Those who have
entered the religious institutions have naturally brought with them traces of this
corruption, for the religious institution make up part of society and the people. We
must therefore strive to reform, intellectually and morally, the members of the
religious institution and to remove the traces left on their minds and spirits by the
insinuating propaganda of the foreigners and the policies of corrupt and treacherous
governments.
One can easily observe the effects of which I speak. For example, sometimes I see
people who sit in the centers of religious institution saying to each other, “These
matters are beyond us; what business are they of ours? All we are supposed to do is to
offer our prayers and to give our opinions on questions of religious law.” Ideas like
these are the result of several centuries of malicious propaganda on the part of the
imperialists penetrating deeply into the very heart of Najaf, Qum, Mashhad, and other
religious centers, causing apathy, depression, and laziness to appear; and preventing
people from maturing, so that they constantly make excuses for themselves and say,
“These matters are beyond us!”
These ideas are wrong. What are the qualifications of those who now rule the
Muslims countries? What gives them the ability to rule that we allegedly lack? Who
among them has any more ability than the average person? Many of them have never
studies anything! Where did the ruler of the Hijāz ever go to study? As for Rizā Khān,
he was totally illiterate, an illiterate soldier, no more! It has been the same throughout
history: many arbitrary and tyrannical rulers have been totally lacking in any capacity
to govern the society or administer the nation and devoid of learning and
accomplishment. What did Hārūn ar-Rashīd337 ever study, or any other man who ruled
over realms as vast as his? Study—the acquisition of knowledge and expertise in
various science—is necessary for making plans for a country and for exercising
executive and administrative functions; we too will make use of people with those
qualifications. But as for the supervision and supreme administration of the country,
the dispensing of justice, and the establishment of equitable relations among the
people—these are precisely the subjects that the faqīih has studied. Whatever is
needed to preserve national independence and liberty is, again, precisely what the
faqīh has to offer. For it is the faqīh, who refuses to submit to others or fall under the
influence of foreigners, and who defends the rights of the nation and the freedom,
independence, and territorial integrity of the Islamic homeland, even at the cost of his
life. It is the faqīh, who does not deviate either to the left or to the right.
336
   Ākhūnd: see n. 5 above.
337
   Hārūn ar-Rashīd: Abbasid caliph who reigned from 180/186-193/809 and was the contemporary of
the seventh and eighth Imāms, Mūsā al-Kāzim and Ridā.


85                                                                       Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
Rid yourselves of your depression and apathy. Improve your methods and program of
propagation, try diligently to present Islam accurately, and resolve to establish an
Islamic government. Assume the lead and join hands with the militant and freedom-
loving people. An Islamic government will definitely be established; have confidence
in yourselves. You have the power, courage, and sense of strategy it takes to struggle
for national liberty and independence, you have succeeded in waking the people and
inspiring them to struggle, casing imperialism and tyranny to tremble. Day by day,
you are accumulating more experience and your ability to deal with the affairs of
society is increasing. Once you have succeeded in overthrowing the tyrannical
regimes, you will certainly be capable of administering the state and guiding the
masses.
The entire system of government and administration, together with the necessary
laws, lies ready for you. If the administration of the country calls for taxes, Islam has
made the necessary provision; and if laws are needed, Islam has established them all.
There is no need for you, after establishing a government, to sit down and draw up
laws, or, like rulers who worship foreigners and are infatuated with the West, run after
others to borrow their laws. Everything is ready and waiting. All that remains is to
draw up ministerial programs, and that can be accomplished with the help and
cooperation of consultants and advisers who are experts in different fields, gathered
together in a consultative assembly.
Fortunately, the Muslim peoples are ready to follow you and your allies. What we are
lacking are the necessary resolve and armed power, and these, too, we shall acquire,
God willing. We need the staff of Moses and the resolve of Moses; we need people
who are able to wield the staff of Moses and the sword of the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a).
But the gutless people who now sit in the religious centers are certainly not capable of
establishing and maintaining a government; for they are so gutless that they cannot
wield even a pen or undertake any activity at all. The foreigners and their agents have
filled our ears with their propaganda so often that we have begun to believe we are
incapable of anything: “Go mind your own business! Attend to your schools, your
classes, your studies. What business of yours are these matters? They are beyond your
capacity!” I cannot disabuse some people of these notions and make them understand
that they must become leaders of humanity; that they are at least the equals of others
and are capable of administrating the country. What qualifications do others have that
they lack? All one can say is that some of the others went abroad to enjoy themselves,
and maybe studied a little while they were there. (We do not say they should not
study. We are not opposed to study or learning. Let them go to the moon, found an
atomic industry; we will not stand in their way. However, we have duties as well.)
Give them Islam; proclaim to the world the program of Islamic government; maybe
the kings and presidents of the Muslim countries will understand the truth of what we
say and accept it. We would not want to take any thing away from them; we will leave
anyone in his place who faithfully follows Islam.
Today, we have 700 million Muslims in the world, 170 million or more of whom are
Shī‘ah. They are all ready to follow us, but we are so lacking in resolve that we are
unable to lead them. We must establish a government that will enjoy the trust of the
people, one in which the people have confidence and to which they will be able to
entrust their destiny. We need trustworthy rulers who will guard the trust the people
have placed with them, so that protected by them and the law, the peoples will be able
to live their lives and go about their tasks in tranquility. These are the things to which
you should be devoting your thought. Do not despair; do not imagine that this task is


86                                                                   Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
impossible. God knows that your capacity and courage are not less than those of
others—unless, of course, the meaning of courage is oppressing and slaughtering the
people; that kind of courage we certainly do not have.
Once that man came to see me while I was in prison338 along with Āqā-yi Qummi339
(may God preserve him), who is under arrest again now. He said: “Politics is all dirt,
lying, and viciousness; why don’t you leave it to us?”
What he said was true in a sense; if that is what politics really consists of, it belongs
exclusively to them. But the politics of Islam, of the Muslims, of the guiding Imāms
who lead God’s servants by means of politics, is quite different from the politics he
was speaking of.
Afterwards, he told the newspapers: “An agreement has been reached to the effect that
the religious leaders will not interfere in politics.” As soon as I was released, I denied
his statement from the minbar. I said: “He is lying; if Khomeini or anyone else gives
such a pledge, he will be expelled from the religious institution!”340
At the outset, they plant in your minds the suggestion that politics means lying and the
like so that you lose all interest in national affairs and they can proceed with their
business undisturbed, doing whatever they like and indulging all their vices.
Meanwhile, you are to sit here offering prayers for their welfare: “May God
perpetuate their rule!” They, of course, do not have the intelligence to elaborate such a
plan themselves (thank God!); it is their masters and the experts who advise them that
devised this plan. The British imperialists penetrated the countries of the East more
than three hundred years ago. Being knowledgeable about all aspects of these
countries, they drew up elaborate plans for assuming control of them. Then came the
new imperialists, the Americans and others. They allied themselves with the British
and took part in the execution of their plans.
Once when I was in Hamadān, a former student of the religious sciences, who had
forsaken the religious garb but preserved his Islamic ethics, came to see me and he
showed me a map on which certain places had been marked in red. He told me that
those red symbols indicated all the mineral resources existing in Iran that had been
located by foreign experts.
Foreign experts have studied our country, and have discovered all our mineral
reserves—gold, copper, petroleum, and so on. They have also made an assessment of
our people’s intelligence and came to the conclusion that the only barriers blocking
their way are Islam and the religious leadership.
They have known the power of Islam themselves for it once ruled part of Europe, and
they know that true Islam is opposed to their activities. They have also realized they
cannot make the true religious scholars submit to their influence, nor can they affect
their thinking. From the very outset, therefore, they have sought to remove this
obstacle from their path by disparaging Islam and besmirching the religious leaders.
They have resorted to malicious propaganda so that today, we imagine that Islam
simply consists of a handful of legal topics. They have also tried to destroy the
reputation of fuqahā and the ‘ulamā, who stand at the head of Islam society, by

338
    “That man” was Hasan Pakravan, head of SAVAK between 1961 and 1965, executed after the
triumph of the Islamic Revolution. This visit occurred on July 2, 1963 when Imām Khomeini was being
detained at the ‘Ashratābād garrison in Tehran. See S.H.R., Barrasī va Tahlīlī, p. 575.
339
    Āqā-yi Qummi: that is, Āyatullāh Hasan Tabātabā’i Qummi, religious leader of Mashhad who
actively cooperated with Imām Khomeini in the movement of Khurdād 15.
340
    For the text of this speech, given at the Masjid-i A‘zam in Qum on March 6, 1964, see anon.,
Biyūgrāfi-yi Pīshvā, n.p., n.d., II, 109-138; Sahīfeh-ye Imām (Tehran: The Institute for Compilation and
Publication of Imam Khomeini’s Works, 1379 Sh.), vol. 1, p. 269. [Pub.]


87                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
slanderous accusations and other means. For example, that shameless agent of
imperialism wrote in his book341: “Six hundred of the ‘ulamā of Najaf and Iran were
on the payroll of the British. Shaykh Murtadā342 took the money for only two years
before he realized where it was coming from. The proof may be found in documents
preserved in the India Office archives.” Imperialism tells him to insult the ‘ulamā so
that it may reap the benefits. Imperialism dearly wants to present all the ‘ulamā as
being on its payroll so that they will lose the respect of the people and the people will
turn away from them. At the same time, they have tried with their propaganda and
insinuations to present Islam as a petty, limited affair, and to restrict the functions of
the fuqahā and ‘ulamā to insignificant matters. They have constantly tried to persuade
us that the only duty of the fuqahā is to give their opinion on legal problems.
Some people, lacking in correct understanding, have believed them and gone astray.
They have failed to realize that all this is part of a plan designed to destroy our
independence and establish control over all aspects of life in the Islamic countries.
Unwittingly, they have assisted the propaganda organs of imperialism in carrying out
its politics and reaching its goals. The propaganda institutions of imperialism have
sought to persuade us that religion must be separate from politics, that the religious
leaders must not interfere in social matters, and that the fuqahā do not have the duty
of overseeing the destiny of the Islamic nation. Unfortunately, some people have
believed them and fallen under their influence, with the result that we see. This result
is what the imperialists have always desired, desire now, and will desire in the future.
Look at the religious teaching centers and you will see the effects of this imperialist
propaganda. You will see negligent, lazy, idle, and apathetic people who do nothing
but discuss points of law and offer their prayers, and are incapable of anything else.
You will also encounter ideas and habits that are born of the same imperialist
propaganda—for example, the idea that to speak is incompatible with the dignity of
the ākhūnd; the ākhūnd and the mujtahīd should not be able to speak, or if they are,
they should not say anything except, “Lā ilāha illa ’Llāh,” or may be one word more!
But that is wrong, and contrary to the Sunnah of God’s Messenger (s). God has
praised speech and expression, as well as writing and the use of pen. For example, He
says in Sūrat ar-Rahmān: “He taught him [man] expression” (55: 4), counting the
instruction in speech that He gave man as a great blessing and a source of nobility.
Speech and expression are necessary for promulgating the ordinances of God and the
teachings and doctrines of Islam; it is by means of them that we can instruct the
people in their religion and fulfill the duty indicated in the phrase: “They instruct the
people.”343 The Most Noble Messenger and the Commander of Faithful both delivered
speeches and sermons; they were men of eloquence.
These foolish ideas that exist in the minds of some people help the imperialists and
the oppressive governments in their attempts to keep the Muslim countries in their
present state and to block the progress of the Islamic movement. Such ideas are
characteristic of those who are known as saintly but in reality are pseudo-saints, not
true ones. We must change the way they think and make clear our attitudes toward
341
    The reference may be to a passage in Mahmūd Mahmūd, Tārīkh-i Ravābit-i Siyāsī-yi Īrān va Inglīs
(Tehran, 1332 Sh./1953), VI, 1743. Sultān Ghāzī ad-Dīn Haydar of Oudh established an endowment of
a hundred lakhs of rupees for the support of the needy in Najaf and Karbala. After his principality was
absorbed into British India, the administration of the endowment passed into British hands. Concerning
the Oudh bequest and its recipients, see Algar, Religion and State, pp. 237-238.
342
    Shaykh Murtadā: that is, Shaykh Murtadā Ansāri, first mujtahid to become the sole source of
guidance (marja’-i taqlīd) of the Shī‘i world, 1216/1801-1281/1865. He was the author of al-Makāsib,
a major work on Shī‘i jurisprudence. See Algar, Religion and State, pp. 162-164.
343
    See p.52.


88                                                                             Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
them, for they are blocking our movement and the reforms we want to carry out, and
are keeping our hands tied.
The late Burūjirdī,344 the late Hujjat,345 the late Sadr,346 and the late Khwansari347
(may God be pleased with all of them) had gathered in our house one day to discuss
some political matter. I said to them: “Before anything else, you must decide what to
do with these pseudo-saints. As long as they are there, our situation is like that of a
person who is attacked by an enemy while someone else keeps his hands bound
behind him. These persons who are known as saints but are pseudo-saints, not real
ones, are totally unaware of the state of society, and if you want to do something—
take over the government, assume control of the Majlis, stop the spread of
corruption—they will destroy your standing in society. Before everything else, you
must decide what to do with them.”
The state of Muslim society today is such that these false saints prevent Islam from
exerting its proper influence; acting in the name of Islam, they are inflicting damage
upon Islam. The roots of this group that exists in our society are to be found in the
centers of the religious institution. In the centers at Najaf, Qum, Mashhad, and
elsewhere, there are individuals who have this pseudo-saintly mentality, and from
their base within the religious institution, they infect the rest of society with their evil
ideas and attitudes. They will oppose anyone who tells the people: “Come now,
awaken! Let us not live under the banners of others! Let us not be subject to the
imposition of Britain and America! Let us not allow Israel to paralyze the Muslims!”
First, we must advise these pseudo-saints and try to awaken them. We must say to
them: “Can you not see the danger? Do you not see that the Israelis are attacking,
killing, and destroying and the British and Americans are helping them? You sit there
watching, but you must wake up; you must try to find a remedy for the ills of the
people. Mere discussion is not enough. Simply pronouncing opinions on points of law
is of no use by itself. Do not keep silent at a time when Islam is being destroyed,
Islam is being wiped out, like Christians who sat discussing the Holy Ghost and the
Trinity until they were destroyed.348 Wake up! Pay some attention to reality and the
questions of the day. Do not let yourselves be so negligent. Are you waiting for the
angels to come and carry you on their wings? Is it the function of the angles to pamper
the idle? The angels spread their wings beneath the feet of the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a) because he was of benefit to Islam: he made Islam great, secured the
expansion of Islam in the world and promoted its interests. Under his leadership, a
free, vital, virtuous society came into being and won fame; everyone had to bow
before him its might, even the enemy. But why should anyone bow before you, whose
only activity is offering opinions on points of law?

344
    Burūjirdi: that is, Āyatullāh Husayn Burūjirdi, concerning whom, see p. xii. See also ‘Abbās al-
‘Abīri, Āyatullāh Al-Broojerdi, trans. Muhammad Hasan Najafi (Qum: Ansariyan Publications). [Pub.]
345
    Hujjat: that is, Āyatullāh Muhammad Hujjat, a teacher for many years and an associate of Āyatullāh
Hā’iri, 1310/1862-1372/1953. He was responsible for the building of Hujjatiyyah Madrasah. See
Muhammad Sharīf Rāzi, Ganjinā-yi Dānishmandān (Tehran, 1352 Sh./1973), I, pp. 305-335.
346
    Sadr: that is, Āyatullāh Sadr ad-Dīn, 1299/1882-1373/1953, another of the chief associates of Hā’iri
in Qum. See Rāzi, Ganjinā-yi Dānishmandān, I, pp. 326-335.
347
    Khwansāri: that is, Āyatullāh Muhammad Taqi Khwansāri, a religious scholar who combined
militancy with learning, 1305/1888-1371/1952. He fought against the British occupiers of Iraq under
the leadership of Mīrzā Muhammad Taqi Shirāzi (see n. 157) before joining the circle of Hā’iri in
Qum. See Rāzi, Ganjinā-yi Dānishmandān, I, pp. 322-326; Hasan Iedrem, Āyatullāh Khonsāri:
Through Sources of Witnesses, trans. ‘Abbās Abū Sa‘eedi (Qum: Ansariyan Publications). [Pub.]
348
      Possibly a reference to the Christological disputes of Byzantium.


89                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
If our pseudo-saints do not wake up, and begin to assume their responsibilities after
repeated admonition and advice, it will be obvious that the cause of their failure is not
ignorance, but something else. Then, of course, we will adopt a different attitude
toward them.
The centers of the religious institution are places for teaching, instruction,
propagation, and leadership. They belong to the just fuqahā, learned scholars,
teachers, and students. They belong to those who are the trustees and successors of the
prophets. They represent a trust, and it is obvious that a divine trust cannot be placed
in the hands of anyone. Whoever wishes to assume such a weighty responsibility, to
administer the affairs of the Muslims and to act as the deputy of the Commander of
the Faithful (‘a), to settle matters concerning the honor, property, and lives of the
people, as well as the booty taken in war and the penal provisions of the law—such a
person must be totally disinterested in the world and devoid of worldly ambition.
Anyone whose efforts are oriented to this world—even in matters that are inherently
legitimate—cannot be the trustee of God, and is not worthy of our trust. Any faqīh
who joins the state apparatus of the oppressors and becomes a hanger-on of the court
is not a trustee and cannot exercise God’s trust. God knows what misfortunes Islam
has suffered—from its inception down to the present at the hands of these evil
‘ulamā! Abū Hurayrah was one of the fuqahā, but God knows what judgments he
falsified for Mu‘āwiyah and others like him, and what damage he inflicted upon
Islam. When an ordinary person enters the service of an oppressive government, he is
to be accounted a sinner, but no greater harm will come of it. But, when a faqīh like
Abū Hurayrah349 or a judge like Shurayh joins such a government, he improves its
standing while besmirching the reputation of Islam. When a faqīh enters the service of
an oppressive government, it is as if the whole ulamā entered it along with him; it is
no longer a question of a single individual. It is for this reason that the Imāms (‘a)
strictly forbade their followers to join the government service, and told them that the
situation they found themselves in had come about because some of them had done
so.
The obligations that are incumbent on the fuqahā do not apply to others; on account of
their position and function, fuqahā must avoid and relinquish even things that are
otherwise licit. In cases where others are permitted to resort to taqiyyah, fuqahā may
not. The purpose of taqiyyah is the preservation of Islam and the Shī‘i school; if
people had not resorted to it, our school of thought would have been destroyed.
Taqiyyah relates to the branches (furū’) of religion; for example—performing ablution
in different ways. But when the chief principles of Islam and its welfare are
endangered, there can be no question of silence or taqiyyah. If they try to force a faqīh

349
   Abū Hurayrah: a companion of the Prophet (d. 59/679) who embraced Islam in 7 A.H. Even though
his companionship with the Prophet hardly exceeded three years, he is reported to have narrated 5,374
of the Prophet’s traditions, more than any other companion. Even during the Era of the Caliphate,
prominent companions used to complain against him. He was named governor of Bahrain by ‘Umar
(but deposed later and was fined with 10 thousand dirhams due to misappropriation of public funds);
judge of Medina by ‘Uthmān (for whom he concocted traditions, extolling his virtues); and governor of
Medina by Mu‘āwiyah. It has been reported that during the Battle of Siffīn he kept aloof from taking
side. Many a times he spent a day in the camp of Imām ‘Ali while in the midst of Mu‘āwiyah’s army in
another day. He used to pray behind ‘Ali while giving preference to partake meals with Mu‘āwiyah. He
said: “Mu’āwiyah’s food is more gorgeous whereas praying behind ‘Ali is more virtuous.” A number
of traditions transmitted by him have been rejected by both Sunni and Shī‘ah scholars. See ‘Allāmah
Sayyid ‘Abdul Husayn Sharafuddīn, Abū Hurayrah; Muhammad Abūzahrā, Abū Hurayrah: Shaykh al-
Madīrah; Abī Abī ’l Hadīd, Sharh Nahj al-Balāghah, vol. 4, pp. 63-69; Ibn Abī ’l Hadīd, Dāyirat al-
Ma‘ārif Islāmiyyah, vol. 1, pp. 418-419. [Pub.]


90                                                                           Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
to mount the minbar and speak in a way contrary to God’s command, can he obey
them, telling himself “Taqiyyah is my religion and the religion of my forefathers”?350
The question of taqiyyah does not even arise here. If a faqīh anticipates that by his
entering the service of an oppressive government, oppression will be furthered and the
reputation of Islam soiled, he must not enter its service even if he is killed as a result.
There is no acceptable excuse he can offer, unless his entry into the service of the
state has some rational basis, as was the case with ‘Ali ibn Yaqtīn,351 whose motives
in joining state service are well-known, and with Khwāja Nāsir Tūsi352 (may God be
pleased with him), whose actions resulted in benefits also well- known.
The true fuqahā of Islam are, of course, free of all guilt in this respect. From the
beginning of Islam down to the present, their example is clear, and shines before us
like a light; they are untouched by guilt. The ākhūnds who joined the service of
governments in past ages did not belong to our school. Not only did our fuqahā
oppose the rulers; they also suffered imprisonment and torture because of their
disobedience.353 Let no one imagine that the ‘ulamā of Islam have ever entered the
service of the state or do so now. Upon occasion, of course, they have entered it in
order to bring the state under their control or transform it; were such a thing possible
now, it would be our duty to do so. But that is not what I am speaking of. Our
problem is the people who wear turbans on their heads, have read a few books
somewhere or other (or nor read them, as the case may be), and joined the service of
the government in order to fill their stomachs or increase the scope of their authority.
What are we to do with them?
Those persons are not Muslim fuqahā; they are people whom SAVAK has issued a
turban and told to pray. If SAVAK cannot force the congregational imāms to be
present on the occasion of government-sponsored festivities and other ceremonies, it
will have its own people on hand ready to say: “Greater be his glory!” (Yes, they have
recently begun to say, “Greater be his glory” when they mention the name of the
Shāh.) These persons are not fuqahā; the people have recognized them for what they
are. A certain tradition warns us to guard our religion against these people, lest they
destroy it. They must be exposed and disgraced so that they may come to lose
whatever standing they enjoy among the people. If their standing in society is not
destroyed, they will destroy the standing of the Imām of the Age and the standing of
Islam itself.
Our youths must strip them of their turbans. The turbans of these ākhūnds, who cause
corruption in Muslim society while claiming to be fuqahā and ‘ulamā, must be
removed. I do not know if our young people in Iran have died; where are they? Why
do they not strip these people of their turbans? I am not saying they should be killed;
they do not deserve to be killed. But take off their turbans! Our people in Iran,
particularly the zealous youths, have a duty not to permit these ākhūnds, these reciters
of “Greater be his glory!” to appear in society and move among the people wearing
turbans. They do not need to be beaten much; just take off their turbans, and do not


350
    A celebrated saying of Imām Ja‘far as-Sādiq.
351
    ‘Ali ibn Yaqtīn: an early Shī‘ah traditionist, 124/742-182/798. His father was a staunch supporter of
the Abbasids during the Umayyad period. He associated with Mansūr, the second Abbasid caliph, and
is said to have assisted him in planning Baghdad. [Pub.]
352
    See n. 173 above.
353
     Although a pattern of alliance between Sunni fuqahā and rulers can be discerned in Islamic history,
it is worth noting that there have been numerous important exceptions, e.g., Abū Hanīfah (80/669-
152/769), founder of the most widespread Sunni law school, who was imprisoned by the ‘Abbasid
caliph Mansūr.


91                                                                              Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
permit them to appear in public wearing turbans. The turban is a noble garment; not
everyone is fit to wear it.
As I have said, the true ‘ulamā of Islam are free of all guilt in this respect; they have
never joined the service of the government. Those who are affiliated with the
government are parasites trying to grow fat on religion and on the ‘ulamā, but they
have nothing to do with the ‘ulamā, and people recognize them for what they are.
We too have difficult tasks facing us. We must improve ourselves spiritually and
improve our way of life. We must become more ascetic than before and completely
shun the goods of this world. All of you must equip yourselves to protect the divine
trust that has been vested in your. Become worthy trustees, and hold the world in less
esteem. You cannot be like the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), who said that the
world was no more to him than the snot of a goat; but turn away from the desire for
worldly gain, purify your souls, turn toward God Almighty, cultivate piety. If your
purpose in studying is—God forbid—to secure your future livelihood, you will never
become fuqahā or trustees of Islam. Prepare yourselves to be useful to Islam; act as
the army for the Imām of the Age in order to be able to serve him in spreading the rule
of justice. The mere existence of righteous people has a beneficial effect on society—
as I myself have observed, one becomes purified by walking with them and keeping
company with them. Act so that your deeds, conduct, character, and aversion to
worldly ambition will have an uplifting effect on people. They will imitate your
example, and you will become models for them and soldiers of God. Only thus can
you make Islam and Islamic government known to the people.
I am not telling you to abandon your studies. Indeed you must study, become fuqahā,
devote yourselves to fiqh, and not permit fiqh to decline in the centers of the religious
institution. Unless you are fuqahā, you will not be able to serve Islam. But while you
study, be concerned, too, with representing Islam accurately to the people. Islam is
now a stranger; no one knows Islam properly. You must convey Islam and its
ordinances to the people so that they understand what Islam is, what Islamic
government is, what prophethood and imamate mean, and in the broadest terms, why
Islam was revealed and what its goals are. Thus Islam will gradually become known,
and, God willing, an Islamic government will one day be established.
Let us overthrow tyrannical governments by: (1) severing all relations with
governmental institutions; (2) refusing to cooperate with them; (3) refraining from any
action that might be construed as aiding them; and (4) creating new judicial, financial,
economic, cultural, and political institutions.
It is the duty of all of us to overthrow tāghūt; i.e., the illegitimate political powers that
now rule the entire Islamic world. The governmental apparatus of tyrannical and anti-
popular regimes must be replaced by institutions serving the public good and
administered according to Islamic law. In this way, an Islamic government will
gradually come into existence. In the Qur’an, God Almighty has forbidden men to
obey the tāghūt—illegitimate regimes—and encouraged them to rise up against kings,
just as He commanded Moses to rebel. There are a number of traditions encouraging
people to fight against oppressors and those who wish to pervert religion. The Imāms
(‘a), joined by their followers, the Shi‘ah, have always fought against tyrannical
governments and illegitimate regimes, as one can easily see by examining their
biographies and way of life. Most of the time they were subject to the pressures of
tyrannical and oppressive rulers, and were compelled to observe taqiyyah out of
extreme fear---not fear for themselves, of course, but fear for their religion, as is
evident from an examination of the relevant traditions. Tyrannical rulers, for their
part, stood in terror of the Imāms. They were aware that if they gave the Imāms the


92                                                                     Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
slightest opportunity, they would rebel and deprive them of their life, which was
synonymous with pleasure-seeking and licentiousness. This is the reason we see
Hārūn arresting Imām Mūsā ibn Ja‘far354 (‘a) and imprisoning him for several years,
and after him, Ma’mūn355 transporting Imām Ridā (‘a) to Marv356 and confining him
there for many years before finally poisoning him. Hārūn and Ma’mūn acted as they
did not because the Imāms were sayyids—i.e., descendants of the Prophet—and the
rulers were opposed to the prophet; indeed, both Hārūn and Ma’mūn were Shī‘ah.357
They were motivated entirely by considerations of state: they knew that the
descendants of ‘Ali laid claim to the caliphate and that their earnest desire was to
establish an Islamic government, considering this to be their duty. One day, it was
suggested to Imām Mūsā ibn Ja‘far that he delineate the boundaries of Fadak358 so
that it might be returned to him. According to a certain tradition, he drew a map of the
entire Islamic realm and said, “Everything within these boundaries is our legitimate
right. We should rule over it, and you are usurpers.” The tyrannical rulers thus saw
that if Imām Musa ibn Ja‘far were free, he would make life impossible for them and
might lay the groundwork for a rebellion and the overthrow of their rule. So they did
not give him the slightest opportunity. Have no doubt that if he had had the chance, he
would indeed have rebelled and overthrow the ruling usurpers.
Ma’mūn similarly kept Imām Ridā under surveillance, cunningly and hypocritically
addressing him as “Cousin” and “Descendant of God’s Messenger” out of fear that
one day he might rise and destroy the foundation of his rule. Since he was indeed a
descendant and a legatee of the Prophet (s), he could not be allowed to go free in
Medina. The tyrannical rulers desired rule and were ready to sacrifice everything for
its sake; they had no personal enmity with anyone. If—God forbid—the Imām (‘a)
had frequented their court, he would have been shown the utmost veneration and
respect; they would even have kissed his hand. According to tradition, when Imām
Ridā came into the presence of Hārūn, the ruler ordered that the Imām be carried on
horseback all the way to his throne and showed him all possible veneration. But when
it was time to distribute the shares that were to be given from the treasury and it was
the turn of the Bani Hāshim to receive their share, Hārūn awarded them only a very
small amount. His son Ma’mūn who was present was surprised as the contrast
between the veneration he had just witnessed and the allotment he now saw being
made. Hārūn told him: “You do not understand. The Bani Hāshim must remain in this
state. They must always be poor, imprisoned, banished, afflicted, even poisoned or
killed; otherwise, they will rise up against us in revolt and ruin our lives.”
The Imāms (‘a) not only fought against tyrannical rulers, oppressive governments, and
corrupt courts themselves, they also summoned the Muslims to wage jihād against
those enemies. There are more than fifty traditions in Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah,359 the
Mustadrak, 360and other books calling on the Muslims to shun tyrannical rulers and
governments and to fill with earth the months of those who praise them, and
threatening anyone who does so much as lend their panegyrists a pen or fill their
inkwells. In short, the Imāms have given orders that all relations with such rulers be

354
    See n. 88 above.
355
    Ma’mūn: Abbasid caliph from 198/813 to 218/833, and persecutor of Imām Ridā (see n. 48 above).
356
    Marv: a city in Transoxiana.
357
    Ma’mūn and his father Hārūn were Shī‘ah in the sense that they implicitly recognized the authority
of Imām Ridā in their dealings with him.
358
    Fadak: see n. 134 above.
359
    Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah: see n. 105.
360
    Mustadrak: see n. 159 above.


93                                                                            Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
severed and that no one collaborate with them in any way. In contrast to these
traditions are others that praise the learned scholars and the just faqīh, and emphasize
their superiority over other men. Taken together, these two classes of traditions form
a program for the establishment of an Islamic government. First, the people are
induced to turn away from the tyrannical government of the oppressors and destroy
their house of oppression; then the houses of fuqahā are to open their doors to the
people: fuqahā who are just and ascetic and who fight in God’s way to implement the
laws of Islam and establish its social systems.
The Muslims will be able to live in security and tranquility and preserve their faith
and morals only when they enjoy the protection of a government based on justice and
law, a government whose form, administrative system, and laws have been laid down
by Islam. It is our duty now to implement and put into practice the plan of a
government established by Islam. I hope that by presenting the system of government
and the political and social principles of Islam to broad segments of humanity, we will
create a strong new current of thought and a powerful and popular movement that will
result in the establishment of an Islamic government.
O God, foreshorten the arms of the oppressors that are stretched out against the lands
of the Muslims and root out all traitors to Islam and the Islamic countries. Awaken the
heads of the Muslims states from their deep sleep so that they may exert themselves
on behalf of their people’s interests and renounce divisiveness and the quest for
personal gain. Grant that the younger generation studying in the religious colleges and
the universities may struggle to reach the sacred aims of Islam and strive together,
with ranks united, first, to deliver the Islamic countries from the clutches of
imperialism and its vile agents, and then to defend them. Grant that the fuqahā and the
scholars may strive to guide and enlighten the minds of the people, to convey the
sacred aims of Islam to all Muslims, particularly the younger generation, and to
struggle for the establishment of an Islamic government. From you is success, and
there is neither recourse nor strength except in God, the Exalted, the Sublime.




94                                                                 Copyright © Iran Chamber Society
