                                                                              1


TRANSCRIPT OF AN INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER,

MR. LEE KUAN YEW, BY MR. MIKE WOOLER, RECORDED IN THE

STUDIOS OF TELEVISION SINGAPURA ON 9TH SEPTEMBER, 1965.




Mr. Mike Wooler:       Mr. Prime Minister, what is the purpose of having

                       British troops here? Are they doing any good, and do

                       they contribute to the stability in the area or to friction

                       in the area?



Mr. Lee:               My purpose is different from that of Britain's. My

                       purpose is first, to ensure that I am not invaded and

                       captured by the Indonesians or other larger powers in

                       the area. I think Britain has slightly different ideas. I

                       do not think it is just love and affection, for Singapore

                       and sentimental reasons. She has got a role to play: to

                       counter reasons. She has got a role to play: to counter

                       balance, with the Americans in Europe. If they play a

                       role here, then they have got more voice about the

                       disposition of affairs in Europe. But the Malaysians,

                       I used to be one, now I am a Singaporean but the


lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                               2



                       Tengku takes a slightly different view, He wants

                       to defend the Free World, whatever that means.



                       I went to defend myself, my little country and my

                       people; then, Malaysia because I think they are one

                       with us whatever edict the Government of the day have

                       proclaimed, separating us. And I think we owe an

                       obligation to Australia and New Zealand who have

                       stuck their necks out committing troops in our defence.



                       Friction? Who with? With Indonesia? You know, if

                       the British troops and the army, navy, air force, left

                       tomorrow, the Indonesian Admiral, Martadinata -- they

                       have got long names, but I think they have got a very

                       shortsighted outlook -- they will just come into my

                       harbour and say, guns pointing, "stand to, hand over or

                       else ..... " and I will be at the pier with the keys,

                       bowing deeply.




lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                                3


                       I say it all happen in 1942 when the Japanese came in.

                       I am not likely to forget it; not likely to want it to

                       happen again.



Mr. Mike Woller:       Mr. Prime Minister, do you have any objections to

                       Singapore remaining a British base for many, many

                       years to come?



Mr. Lee:               Not really. Why should I? It protects me and

                       contributes about 20 to 25% of my GNP as the slang

                       goes or the Gross National Product. Troops spend

                       money: (on) dry clearners, photographers, cafes,

                       cabarets and so on: the multiplier effect.



                       But I expect one day Britain may not find it worth her

                       while: in may be 10, 15, 20 years. Then I have got to

                       make other arrangements, perhaps with the Australians

                       and the New Zealanders. I do not know.



                       I think we first solve the present, keeping an eye on the

                       long-term future.


lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                            4


Mr. Mike Wooler:       Do you think that British forces are here to maintain

                       the balance of power, even to contain China through

                       SEATO? If so, is it in your opinion a realistic policy?



Mr. Lee:               I do not know what the British intentions are. You had

                       better ask Mr.Harold Wilson or Mr.Dennis Healey.

                       But if you ask my opinion it is not very well informed,

                       but just an interested opinion I do not think Britain can

                       contain China. How can it....? What have you got? 50

                       million people? What is your industrial capacity? You

                       want to contain 700 million people? How can

                       Singapore contribute to it? Small bush-fire wars,

                       localised. You, know, fighting with the Indonesians

                       who use slabs of TNT and gelignite; having to be

                       patient, manning the long thousand-mile border in

                       Borneo with Indonesia. That, Britain can do, I think

                       she does it very well. But, fighting China? That is a

                       different proposition.



                       I know the Americans are a very powerful nation. But

                       I sometimes wish they had some leaders equal to the


lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                            5


                       power because even they, I think, in the long run, must

                       come to terms.



                       I do not know if you ever read Mao Tse-tung. I do,

                       because I know lots of other Chinese in Singapore,

                       young boys and girls are reading him and I have got to

                       know the impasse on their minds. This is a man who

                       belongs to a very great civilisation. It has got a long

                       history, and people with long histories have long

                       memories and if you read his latest interview with

                       Edgar Snow which was published in the London

                       Observer, you will see that the man was calculating in

                       terms of the next thousand years; not in terms of in his

                       life-time. He is nearly 80, 70-odd. He is not

                       concerned with his life-time or that of his successor.

                       He calculates in terms of the next generation, the next

                       century, the next thousand years.



                       The Americans, I fear, are calculating in terms of the

                       next Presidential elections. I think it is a grave

                       disadvantage when you have got two protagonists, one


lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                            6


                       quite with this enormous depth and perspective, quite

                       oblivious of their immedeiate, personal self-interest,

                       but determined and ruthlessly determined that history

                       will be shaped their way ...



Mr. Mike Wooler:       Do you think China has imperialistic intentions on a

                       large area of Asia?



Mr. Lee:               I do not know. Again, you have got to ask the

                       Chinese, or you have to ask the China Prime Minister,

                       if he will tell you.



                       I would say again as an interested observer, and a

                       student of politics in the region reading their statements

                       with considerable care because, as I said, other people

                       in Singapore are also reading it that they are not really

                       interested in sending their troops across their borders

                       to conquer Asia because then, Communism is equated

                       with Chinese imperialism. You know, Chinese troops

                       spreading into North Vietnam, South Vietnam,

                       Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, Burma, Malaysia. That


lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                             7


                       does no good to them. But I think they are quite

                       determined that this area shall be "communised". In

                       other words, local indigenous Communist parties will

                       be encouraged, aided and abetted to assume power.

                       That makes it a far more delicate and complicated

                       situation to deal with. And I do not think you can deal

                       with it just by the gun.



Mr. Mike Wooler:       I agree with you. Mr. Prime Minister, what would

                       happen if Britain left Singapore for her own reasons?

                       What would happen economically, as far as Singapore

                       was concerned?



Mr. Lee:               Well, that depends when Britain leaves, doesn't it? If he

                       left immediately or within the next five to seven years

                       before we have developed a momentum of our own

                       and can absorb the base workers about 50,000 families

                       I think we are in some difficulties. 20 to 25% of our

                       Gross National Product lost. But I think in the long

                       run, this place has got sufficient resilience, enterprise

                       and sheer grit: we will make the grade.


lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                              8




                       This was a little fishing village when Stamford Raffles

                       came here 150 years ago. And it is just marsh land,

                       with as few rivers and one little hill called Fort

                       Canning where he mounted a cannon. Today, this is

                       one of the few cities in Asia where you can get

                       anything you want, anything you like: French cuisine;

                       British if you like with boiled potatoes; Chinese cuisine

                       infinite variety; and there is Indian and Malay. You can

                       buy any variety of shoes, shirts, cameras anything

                       available anywhere in the world. And it is just the

                       human effort. And I do not think we will lose that

                       human effort.



                       It is a young city. About 60% of our population are

                       under 21. And on the 2nd anniversary of Malaysia, the

                       real anniversary which is the 16th of September, I will

                       be 42. So, assuming that the expectation of life in the

                       tropics, is what it is in Singapore it is about 60 years --

                       I think I have got a faint spell to go and my younger




lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                              9


                       generations have got a long time to go. And we are

                       breeding tougher men than the ones the British bred.



Mr. Mike Wooler:       Mr. Prime Minister if we left, who will fill the vacuum?



Mr. Lee:               I would say immediately if you were to leave before

                       we are ready, the Indonesians -- because they are all

                       around us. I can see their forward bases where they

                       are training our assassins.



                       In the old days, the local communists did not really

                       constitute a danger because you cannot have gun

                       practice and hand-grenade problem without being

                       heard and discovered. But now you can nip across

                       four to five miles of water with a fast outboard motor,

                       (get) four to five months of training, and you are a real

                       pro in the job: a real professional killer. Well,

                       that is life. And I think our chaps will learn how to

                       deal with real professional killers.




lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                            10


Mr. Mike Wooler:       You have been quoted as saying that there's something

                       wrong about blonde men with guns defending Asia.

                       Do you still feel that way about it?



Mr. Lee:               I cannot help feeling that way. Don't you think if

                       brown and black men were defending Aryan types in

                       Britain -- Anglo Saxons -- that you would feel a little

                       embarrassed? But, what to do? I have just got to grin

                       to look after ourselves; and eventually I hope in South

                       Asia, there will be some kind of multi-lateral defence

                       system: India, Burma, Malaysia, Thailand, Laos,

                       Cambodia, the Philippines and even Indonesia if she

                       realises that small though we may be, we are not a

                       digestable morsel. Once they recognise that, I think

                       there is no reason why we should not live and co-

                       operate: live and let live co-operate for each other's

                       benefit.



Mr. Mike Wooler:       Mr. Prime Minister, would you care to comment on the

                       present situation, the present war situation that is going

                       on at the moment in Pakistan and India.


lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                           11




Mr. Lee:               It is a very delicate question. I will tell you where my

                       sympathies are.



                       I do not know the rights and wrongs of it because I

                       have heard both sides and I know the Paksistanis are

                       pressing very hard the U.N. Security Council

                       resolution: you know, the plebiscite and so on ... it was

                       promised 18 years ago and so on ... But the Indians

                       are my friends. They were the first non-European

                       Commonwealth country to recognise Singapore. The

                       Pakistanis, I am sorry to say, although General Ayub

                       and his Government have always been friendly to me,

                       and we have been friendly to them -- they have not

                       recognised us yet.



                       You see there is a little nut-cracker as they say. In the

                       South, there is Indonesia; in the North, there is

                       Pakistan and another very big power. And in between

                       that nut-cracker, the nuts are India, the smaller

                       countries of South-East Asia; Malaysia and Singapore.


lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                            12




                       I hope, in the end, that President Ayub will recognise

                       that perhaps we are not as "OLDEFO" as dying

                       (established) forces": "OLD-E-FO" He is very good.

                       He coins new words and slogans like "NEFO" New

                       (Emerging) Forces.



                       I am not a big powerful force because we are a very

                       small country, small in size, geographic area and in

                       population. But the survival of a people is not in the

                       numbers of population and the breadth of territory

                       alone. It is the quality of the men. And I think

                       Singapore, having gone through two decades of

                       turbulance, has got steel in it. And whether the

                       Indonesians think we are "OLDEFOs" or not, my

                       colleagues and I -- some of us are in our 50's -- I am in

                       my 40's -- we are generation younger than President

                       Sukarno and his colleagues. He might outlive me, I do

                       not know. But if you ask the actuary, I think he will

                       say the chances of my colleagues and I outliving them

                       are fairly good. And I think being younger, we have


lky\1965\lky0909.doc
                                                                          13


                       got the ideas of the younger generation. In other words

                       we know more about the modern world, we are tired of

                       slogans flogging dead horses. We are interested in

                       development, progress, prosperity; in how to emerge,

                       not in talking of "emerging" which is a euphemism for

                       not emerging, for under-development or non-

                       development, or worse, mismanagment and chaos.

                       Well, that is not my business. Mine is to ensure that

                       the world understands that we have got a right to live

                       and those who do not recognise that right, they jolly

                       well lump it.



Mr. Mike Wooler:       Mr. Prime Minister, thank you very much.



Mr. Lee:               Thank you.




9th September, 1965.




lky\1965\lky0909.doc
