                                                                                1


SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. LEE KUAN YEW,

AT THE 1ST ANNUAL DINNER OF THE SINGAPORE

ADVOCATES AND SOLICITORS SOCIETY HELD ON

18TH MARCH,1967, AT ADELPHI HOTEL.



Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,



With most newly independent countries, there are many first times that one is

filled to surfeit with the occasion of so many historic events falling upon each

other.



But I was induced into accepting your invitation to attend the first dinner of the

newly established Advocates and Solicitors Society by the prospect of being

able, in some convivial atmosphere, to share with you, perhaps, some of the

anxieties which occasionally assail my colleagues and I about the continuance of

the rule of law in newly-emergent countries.



Mr. President, you have spoken so eloquently on the importance of the certainty

of any man's future -- his capacity to live in peace, untroubled, unmolested,

unpunished for crimes which he did not know were crimes until he found himself




lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                                  2


before a firing squad which happens so often to many people in other parts of the

world.



First of all, the fact that today the rule of law is reasonably established -- no one

doubts that anyone will be executed at the whim and fancy of somebody else -- is

cause for quiet congratulations. For it might so very easily have been otherwise in

so many ways. There were moments in 1964 and in 1965 when we felt that,

perhaps, we were going the way of so many other places in the world. But we

did not.



In 1964, I visited in the course of my duties as a representative of the Prime

Minister of what is now a foreign neighbouring government, a country where the

Chief Justice has only recently been detained. Any why? Because he acquitted

on appeal, or in a trial, a former Minister of some charge that he was out to kill

the President of the newly-independent nation. And the whole judiciary was

changed. It was not just the Chief Justice who was detained. A new Chief

Justice was appointed and all the judges were left in no doubt as to who was the

most important ratio decidendi in any case.



In other parts of the world where there are more refined, polite and courteous

ways of doing things, one does not put the Chief Justice in jail. One merely


lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                                 3


appoints a relative to the post. You do not have to hang your relative. You just

make sure that he understands how he got there!



Newly-independent countries share one thing in common. They all have a

tremendous addiction to pomp and panoply of office. Protocol is most important.

If you just get a person shot in a dusk corner, it is not so satisfying as to have him

go through the ritual of a trial, and he is cross-examined and all his wicked deeds

-- unconnected with the charge exposed.



I read of somebody who was in charge of some banking institution of a country

of great natural wealth. And we heard all about the beautiful women who were

supplied to presidents and to the guests of presidents. But I often wondered what

that had to do with the charge that was brought against him. It was irrelevant!



The man was going to be summarily executed. But it would be such a shame just

to take him round the corner and finish him off so quickly. So, one does it with

some ceremonial splendour and thereby establishes the ascendency of the new

regime!



We have, fortunately, escaped some of these excesses.




lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                                 4


And I would like, apart from congratulations, to hope that we are sufficiently

perceptive and determined that it will never happen to us.



It might be good fortune, perhaps, that not just I alone but some of my colleagues

were brought up in fairly liberal traditions. We don't have to be lawyers to

understand right, wrong, good, evil. This is basic and fundamental in the values

of a people.



And I think even if the Minister for Law and myself were to go wrong, you will

have some consolation, Mr. President, in the knowledge that quite a number of

my colleagues are men imbued with some of the values, some of the traditions of

an open, of an equal, of a tolerant society.



You cannot maintain that kind of a society unless you are prepared to practise it

yourself. In other words, your style must be open. You must yourself be tolerant.

And, most important of all, you must be able to ensure, in so far as you can, that

your successors -- even though they may not be of the same political colour as

you are -- are imbued with this value.



Let us not deceive ourselves that we can do all these things because we just

believe in democracy, the rule of law and the certainty of the law.


lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                                  5




You know, we have paid a very heavy price. We have departed in quite a number

of material aspects -- in very material fields from the principles of justice and the

liberty of the individual, in particular -- in order to maintain these standards, in

order that there shall be a Bar; that there will be judges who will sit in judgement

over right and wrong; that police will produce witnesses and that witnesses for

certain crimes shall require corroboration and the evidence shall be in accordance

with the Evidence Ordinance.



But let me tell you the price today right at this moment: 620 criminal detainees

under the Criminal Law Temporary Provisions Ordinance, 100 of whom are

murderers, kidnappers and armed robbers. And quite a number of these cases,

though self-confessed, were acquitted at trial. You are landed with a murderer

who has confessed to a murder and you know it is true by all the circumstantial

evidence, and that to let him out is to run the very grave risk of undermining your

whole social fabric. But you played it according to the rules of the game and it

did not work.



There are 720 criminal law supervisees -- men on whom the due processes of law

were unable to place even an iota of evidence. But for the fact that they are

required to stay at home by night, I think life would be less what it is in


lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                                 6


Singapore, for their nocturnal activities can make your motor-car outside a less

useful vehicle of transportation, amongst other things.



This is true. We have had to adjust, to temporarily deviate from, ideals and

norms. This is a heavy price. We have over a hundred political detainees, men

against whom we are unable to prove anything in a court of law. Nearly 50 of

them are men who gave us a great deal of anxiety during the years of

confrontation because they were Malay extremists. Your life and this dinner

would not be what it is if my colleagues and I had decided to play it according to

the rules of the game.



So let us always remember the price that we have had to pay in order to maintain

the general standards -- relationship between man and man; man and authority;

citizen and citizen; citizen and authority -- except in the cost of these 620

detainees under the Criminal Law Temporary Provisions Ordinance. But it is an

expression of an ideal when we say "Temporary Provisions".



You know, it has gone on for the last 8 years. I remember being a party to it,

saying "Aye" when the previous government moved it some 11 years ago. And

we have had to change the law itself. For instance, the Vehicles Theft Ordinance

-- too many cars were being stolen. Heavy penalties were sought -- 7 or 8 years


lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                                  7


ago we did that and we said, "10 years punishment". And yet young magistrates

sometimes say, "Poor man. He is just trying the first time. Let him off for a year"!



And there is the new law in regard to poster pasting. If you do it in an indelible

form, you get a whacking. I and the Minister of Law who is a lawyer had to fight

a tremendous duel with the Attorney-General's office to formulate this law. We

knew there was a plan for the whole city to be plastered with paint -- red paint,

black paint. But the Magistrate doesn't understand. He doesn't read Chinese. He

doesn't know what these things exhort. It is just so much messy paint on the

walls. He doesn't know how difficult it is to catch one man out of hundreds that

did it; how difficult it is to be on the spot at 3 or 4 o'clock in the morning and to

apprehend one of them. It is quite an effort.



And when you get one, to the utter and absolute disgust of the police, he is just

cautioned and discharged. And so we said, "Second conviction -- compulsory

caning." And you know, we have a lot of liberal lawyers in the Attorney-

General's Chambers. They would not put up a draft. They literally refused. They

wrote long screeds why this was against the best traditions of penology.



I was happy, Mr. President, that you used the phrase 'a conscientious Bar". But I

don't think, Mr. President, you understand why I was happy. I knew what you


lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                                 8


intended. I learnt as a student that a word has three meanings; what the speaker

intends it to mean; what the mass of people understand it to mean; what I

understand it to mean.



And I think I knew what you intended it to mean, and I think I knew what the

mass of people here knew what a conscientious Bar understood it to mean --

people who assiduously, in pursuit of their profession, turn up the law books,

take every technical point in favour of their client and, thereby, have discharged

their obligations, and justice is done.



That wasn't the meaning that I suddenly felt when you said, "a conscientious

Bar". I thought of a bar with a conscience, a social conscience towards your own

society. Do you feel for them? Every time a criminal law detainee is taken in, it

is an admission of failures -- failure in providing that man with sufficient

opportunity to develop his talent in a meaningful way.



And every time I go to a Works Brigade Camp where these detainees are being

rehabilitated and I see the productivity in it compared with the other Works

Brigade Camps, I am reminded what tremendous glands that they must have had.

They rear chickens and plant vegetables better than any other Works Brigade

Camp. But they went wrong somewhere. In other words, we failed.


lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                                  9




I would like, therefore, to appeal to your conscience this evening since it is, as

your President has said, "a conscientious Bar". I appeal to your conscience to try

and help us find the answers to some of these problems.



First of all, the Bar: the courts, the administration of justice. If we continue as in

the past, it will fail. I will tell you how the British maintained it in Singapore.



They recruited the younger sons of wealthy families -- or not so wealthy families

-- who could not afford to have the young man dawdling and earning very little at

the Bar in the first five years of his career. They offered him stability, security,

early retirement, handsome pensions, a good life whilst he performed his duties.

He was not attracted by what was happening in private practice -- not until

Malayanisation came in. And then the picture got distorted.



Now you are recruiting from within the system. And the man who is going to

make your potential Attorney-General is not going to stay in Government Service

when he sees his contemporaries earn more in private practice. It is an insult to a

man's self-esteem to watch what a really good advocate with a good legal mind

can earn outside. In Government Service the most he can hope for is $2,000




lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                              10


odd, plus certain perks of office. So how are you going to get the right people to

man your High Court Bench?



Then there is the other problem -- of a weak magistrate or a judge buffeted

between two powerful counsels. And I have, from time to time, seen these

proceedings particularly in the lower courts. The magistrate's or judge's main

concern is not with the man or the woman or the case -- the rights or the wrongs

of the law -- but with the counsel who is going to upset his judgement on appeal.

For too many appeals upset must mean some blot on the copy book when it

comes to promotion. There is a Legal Service Commission with a Chief Justice,

two senior judges and the Chairman of the Public Services Commission, who do

not know all these problems: that the poor young man was fearful of all the

tremendous barrage of arguments put forward. All he wanted to do was to do the

right thing and the right thing was to convict the chap. But how? He did not

know how and he said, "Well, who is likely to hold me up on appeal?"



And I remember on one occasion -- it was already beginning to happen even

whilst I was in practice -- one of the advocates had to assure the judge that he

would be there on the appeal. He would be doing the appeal. And the

judgement went his way.




lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                                 11


I can tell you all the other things that could go wrong. You know, Income tax

cases. Mediocrity on the government side, talent in private practice, and you will

lose millions of dollars. And the number of the kidnappers, murderers, armed

robbers who get off and had to be detained -- contrary to our ideals of a free

democratic society.



So many other things could go wrong, you know. But we could safeguard

ourselves against these if we remember that there are certain ideals, certain

standards, certain norms which are desirable and should be striven for; then

relate that to your existing society, your existing circumstances: what is

achievable in this given situation. The crucial thing is: do not be afraid to

innovate.



I will give you an illustration of where I am at the moment thinking of real

innovations. This is in regard to the problem of bribery and corruption.



We live in an area where to be corrupt is a way of life. And there are scales

starting from 20 cents for this to 40 cents for that, to two dollars for this. There

are rates for the job. You know it, I know it.




lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                                12


What is most important really for us is that because it is a way of life for others

around us, it has to be understood.



What is your answer?



I say unless you are able to give our Civil Servants that pride in their standards

and reward them for being able to maintain those standards, the standards in the

end will be undermined.



I am seriously contemplating an innovation in the law because corruption is one

of our key problems. Singapore's progress, its verve, its vitality is assured

because the administrative machine works. There is no grit. You don't have to

grease somebody to crank up the machine. We must keep it that way. To ensure

this, I am thinking of an amendment to the law. The innovation is: if any official

is found with wealth which cannot be explained and there is uncorroborative

evidence of corruption, his whole property can be sequestered. There must be

some punishment or they get away. And I have not the slightest doubt that there

will be an uproar from a lot of people, not least of all from members practising in

the criminal law.




lky/1967/lky0318.doc
                                                                              13


You have done me the great compliment, Mr. President, of reminding those

present how long we have been in office. But I think the deepest compliment we

could pay ourselves is to remember that there must come a time -- and not so

very long -- when the torch must be passed on. And there is no greater

compliment that a man can pay to himself and to his group than to pass the torch

on to like-minded people, fired by the same ideals, but younger, more vigorous,

more capable to meet a more contemporary situation.



I would like to believe that, as with me, so with you: as you pass the torch on to

the next generation, you pass it on not only to capable hands but to good minds

and good hearts.




lky/1967/lky0318.doc
