A Future Anglo-German War Will Become an Armed Conflict between Two Groups of
Powers

The central factor of the period of world history through which we are now passing is the rivalry
between England and Germany. This rivalry must inevitably lead to an armed struggle between them,
the issue of which will, in all probability, prove fatal to the vanquished side. The interests of these two
powers are far too incompatible, and their simultaneous existence as world powers will sooner or later
prove impossible. On the one hand, there is an insular State, whose world importance rests upon its
domination of the sea, its world trade, and its innumerable colonies. On the other, there is a powerful
continental empire, whose limited territory is insufficient for an increased population. It has therefore
openly and candidly declared that its future is on the seas. It has, with fabulous speed, developed an
enormous world commerce, built for its protection a formidable navy, and, with its famous trademark,
"Made in Germany," created a mortal danger to the industrial and economic prosperity of its rival.
Naturally, England cannot yield without a fight, and between her and Germany a struggle for life or
death is inevitable.

The armed conflict impending as a result of this rivalry cannot be confined to a duel between England
and Germany alone. Their resources are far too unequal, and, at the same time, they are not
sufficiently vulnerable to each other. Germany could provoke rebellion in India, in South Africa, and,
especially, a dangerous rebellion in Ireland, and paralyze English sea trade by means of privateering
and, perhaps, submarine warfare, thereby creating for Great Britain difficulties in her food supply; but,
in spite of all the daring of the German military leaders, they would scarcely risk landing in England,
unless a fortunate accident helped them to destroy or appreciably to weaken the English navy. As for
England, she will find Germany absolutely invulnerable. All that she may achieve is to seize the
German colonies, stop German sea trade, and, in the most favorable event, annihilate the German
navy, but nothing more. This, however, would not force the enemy to sue for peace. There is no doubt,
therefore, that England will attempt the means she has more than once used with success, and will risk
armed action only after securing participation in the war, on her own side, of powers stronger in a
strategical sense. But since Germany, for her own part, will not be found isolated, the future Anglo-
German war will undoubtedly be transformed into an armed conflict between two groups of powers, one
with a German, the other with an English orientation.

It Is Hard to Discover Any Real Advantages to Russia in Rapprochement with England

Until the Russo-Japanese War, Russian policy has neither orientation. From the time of the reign of
Emperor Alexander 111, Russia had a defensive alliance with France, so firm as to assure common
action by both powers in the event of attack upon either, but, at the same time, not so close as to
obligate either to support unfailingly, with armed force, all political actions and claims of the ally. At the
same time, the Russian Court maintained the traditional friendly relations, based upon ties of blood,
with the Court of Berlin. Owing precisely to this conjuncture, peace among the great powers was not
disturbed in the course of a great many years, in spite of the presence of abundant combustible
material in Europe. France, by her alliance with Russia, was guaranteed against attack by Germany;
the latter was safe, thanks to the tried pacifism and friendship of Russia, from revanche ambitions on
the part of France; and Russia was secured, thanks to Germany's need of maintaining amicable
relations with her, against excessive intrigues by Austria-Hungary in the Balkan peninsula. Lastly,
England, isolated and held in check by her rivalry with Russia in Persia, by her diplomats' traditional
fear of our advance on India, and by strained relations with France, especially notable at the time of the
well-known Fashoda incident, viewed with alarm the increase of Germany's naval power, without,
however, risking an active step.

The Russo-Japanese War radically changed the relations among the great powers and brought
England out of her isolation. As we know, all through the Russo-Japanese War, England and America
observed benevolent neutrality toward Japan, while we enjoyed a similar benevolent neutrality from
France and Germany. Here, it would seem, should have been the inception of the most natural political
combination for us. But after the war, our diplomacy faced abruptly about and definitely entered upon
the road toward rapprochement with England. France was drawn into the orbit of British policy; there
was formed a group of powers of the Triple Entente, with England playing the dominant part; and a
clash, sooner or later, with the powers grouping themselves around Germany became inevitable.

Now, what advantages did the renunciation of our traditional policy of distrust of England and the
rupture of neighborly, if not friendly, relations with Germany promise us then and at present?

Considering with any degree of care the events which have taken place since the Treaty of Portsmouth,
we find it difficult to perceive any practical advantages gained by us in rapprochement with England.
The only benefit-improved relations with Japan-is scarcely a result of the Russo-English
rapprochement. There is no reason why Russia and Japan should not live in peace; there seems to be
nothing over which they need quarrel. All Russia's objectives in the Far East, if correctly understood,
are entirely compatible with Japan's interests. These objectives, in their essentials, are very modest.
The too broad sweep of the imagination of overzealous executive officials, without basis in genuine
national interests, on the one hand, and the excessive nervousness and impressionability of Japan, on
the other, which erroneously regarded these dreams as a consistently executed policy-these were the
things that provoked a clash which a more capable diplomacy would have managed to avoid.

Russia needs neither Korea nor even Port Arthur. An outlet to the open sea is undoubtedly useful, but
the sea in itself is, after all, not a market, but merely a road to a more advantageous delivery of goods
at the consuming markets. As a matter of fact, we do not possess, and shall not for a long time possess
any goods in the Far East that promise any considerable profits in exportation abroad. Nor are there
any markets for the export of our products. We cannot expect a great supply of our export commodities
to go to industrially and agriculturally developed America, to poor, but likewise industrial, Japan, or
even to the maritime sections of China and remoter markets, where our exports would inevitably meet
the competition of goods from the industrially stronger rival powers. There remains the interior of China,
with which our trade is carried on, chiefly overland. Consequently, an open port would aid the import of
foreign merchandise more than the export of our own products.

Japan, on her part, no matter what is said, has no desire for our Far Eastern possessions. The
Japanese are by nature a southern people, and the harsh environment of our Far Eastern borderland
cannot attract them. We know that even within Japan itself northern Yezo is sparsely populated, while
apparently Japanese colonization is making little headway even in the southern part of Sakhalin Island,
ceded to Japan under the Treaty of Portsmouth. After taking possession of Korea and Formosa, Japan
will hardly go farther north, and her ambitions, it may be assumed, will turn rather in the direction of the
Philippine Islands, Indo-China, Java, Sumatra, and Borneo. The most she might desire would be the
acquisition, for purely commercial reasons, of a few more sections of the Manchurian railway.

In a word, peaceable coexistence, nay, more, a close rapprochement, between Russia and Japan in
the Far East is perfectly natural, regardless of any mediation by England. The grounds for agreement
are self-evident. Japan is not a rich country, and the simultaneous upkeep of a strong army and a
powerful navy is hard for her. Her insular situation drives her to strengthen her naval power, and
alliance with Russia would allow her to devote all her attention to her navy, especially vital in view of
her imminent rivalry with America, leaving the protection of her interests on the continent to Russia. On
our part, we, having the Japanese navy to protect our Pacific coast, could give up once for all the
dream, impossible to us, of creating a navy in the Far East.

Thus, so far as our relations with Japan are concerned, the rapprochement with England has yielded us
no real advantage. And it has gained us nothing in the sense of strengthening our position in
Manchuria, Mongolia, or even the Ulianghai territory, where the uncertainty of our position bears
witness that the agreement with England has certainly not freed the hands of our diplomats. On the
contrary, our attempt to establish relations with Tibet met with sharp opposition from England.

In Persia, also, our position has been no better since the conclusion of this agreement. Every one
recalls our predominant influence in that country under the Shah Nasr-Eddin, that is, exactly at a time
when our relations with England were most strained. From the moment of our accord with the latter, we
have found ourselves drawn into a number of strange attempts to impose upon the Persian people an
entirely needless constitution, with the result that we ourselves contributed to the overthrow, for the
benefit of our inveterate enemies, of a monarch who was devoted to Russia. That is, not only have we
gained nothing, but we have suffered a loss all along the line, ruining our prestige and wasting many
millions of rubles, even the precious blood of Russian soldiers, who were treacherously slain and, to
please England, not even avenged.

The worst results, however, of the accord with England--and of the consequent discord with Germany--
have been felt in the Near East. As we know, it was Bismarck who coined that winged phrase about the
Balkan problem not being worth to Germany the bones of a single Pomeranian grenadier. Later the
Balkan complications began to attract much more attention from German diplomacy, which had taken
the "Sick Man" under its protection, but even then Germany, for a long time, failed to show any
inclination to endanger relations with Russia in the interests of Balkan affairs. The proofs are patent.
During the period of the Russo-Japanese War and the ensuing turmoil in our country, it would have
been very easy for Austria to realize her cherished ambitions in the Balkan peninsula. But at that time
Russia had not yet linked her destinies with England, and Austria-Hungary was forced to lose an
opportunity most auspicious for her purposes.

No sooner had we taken the road to closer accord with England, however, than there immediately
followed the annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a step which might have been taken so easily and
painlessly in 1905 or 1906. Next came the Albanian question and the combination with the Prince of
Wied. Russian diplomacy attempted to answer Austrian intrigue by forming a Balkan league, but this
combination, as might have been expected, proved to be quite unworkable. Intended to be directed
against Austria, it immediately turned on Turkey and fell apart in the process of dividing the spoils taken
from the latter. The final result was merely the definite attachment of Turkey to Germany, in whom, not
without good reason, she sees her sole protector. In short, the Russo-British rapprochement evidently
seems to Turkey as tantamount to England's renouncing her traditional policy of closing the
Dardanelles to us, while the creation of the Balkan league, under the auspices of Russia, appeared as
a direct threat to the continued existence of Turkey as a European power.

To sum up, the Anglo-Russian accord has brought us nothing of practical value up to this time, while for
the future, it threatens us with an inevitable armed clash with Germany.

Fundamental Alignments in the Coming War

Under what conditions will this clash occur and what will be its probable consequences? The
fundamental groupings in a future war are self-evident: Russia, France, and England, on the one side,
with Germany, Austria, and Turkey, on the other. It is more than likely that other powers, too, will
participate in that war, depending upon circumstances as they may exist at the war's outbreak. But,
whether the immediate cause for the war is furnished by another clash of conflicting interests in the
Balkans, or by a colonial incident, such as that of Algeciras, the fundamental alignment will remain
unchanged.

Italy, if she has any conception of her real interests, will not join the German side. For political as well
as economic reasons, she undoubtedly hopes to expand her present territory. Such an expansion may
be achieved only at the expense of Austria, on one hand, and Turkey, on the other. It is, therefore,
natural for Italy not to join that party which would safeguard the territorial integrity of the countries at
whose expense she hopes to realize her aspirations. Furthermore, it is not out of the question that Italy
would join the anti-German coalition, if the scales of war should incline in its favor, in order to secure for
herself the most favorable conditions in sharing the subsequent division of spoils.

In this respect, the position of Italy is similar to the probable position of Rumania, which, it may be
assumed, will remain neutral until the scales of fortune favor one or another side. Then, animated by
normal political self-interest, she will attach herself to the victors, to be rewarded at the expense of
either Russia or Austria. Of the other Balkan States, Serbia and Montenegro will unquestionably join
the side opposing Austria, while Bulgaria and Albania (if by that time they have not yet formed at least
the embryo of a State) will take their stand against the Serbian side. Greece will in all probability remain
neutral or make common cause with the side opposing Turkey, but that only after the issue has been
more or less determined. The participation of other powers will be incidental, and Sweden ought to be
feared, of course, in the ranks of our foes.

Under such circumstances, a struggle with Germany presents to us enormous difficulties, and will
require countless sacrifices. War will not find the enemy unprepared, and the degree of his
preparedness will probably exceed our most exaggerated calculations. It should not be thought that this
readiness is due to Germany's own desire for war. She needs no war, so long as she can attain her
object-the end of exclusive domination of the seas. But, once this vital object is opposed by the
coalition, Germany will not shrink from war, and, of course, will even try to provoke it, choosing the
most auspicious moment.

The Main Burden of the War Will Fall on Russia

The main burden of the war will undoubtedly fall on us, since England is hardly capable of taking a
considerable part in a continental war, while France, poor in man power, will probably adhere to strictly
defensive tactics, in view of the enormous losses by which war will be attended under present
conditions of military technique. The part of a battering-ram, making a breach in the very thick of the
German defense, will be ours, with many factors against us to which we shall have to devote great
effort and attention.

From the sum of these unfavorable factors we should deduct the Far East. Both America and Japan--
the former fundamentally, and the latter by virtue of her present political orientation--are hostile to
Germany, and there is no reason to expect them to act on the German side. Furthermore, the war,
regardless of its issue, will weaken Russia and divert her attention to the West, a fact which, of course,
serves both Japanese and American interests. Thus, our rear will be sufficiently secure in the Far East,
and the most that can happen there will be the extortion from us of some concessions of an economic
nature in return for benevolent neutrality. Indeed, it is possible that America or Japan may join the anti-
German side, but, of course, merely as usurpers of one or the other of the unprotected German
colonies.

There can be no doubt, however, as to an outburst of hatred for us in Persia, and a probable unrest
among the Moslems of the Caucasus and Turkestan; it is possible that Afghanistan, as a result of that
unrest, may act against us; and, finally, we must foresee very unpleasant complications in Poland and
Finland. In the latter, a rebellion will undoubtedly break out if Sweden is found in the ranks of our
enemies. As for Poland, it is not to be expected that we can hold her against our enemy during the war.
And after she is in his power, he will undoubtedly endeavor to provoke an insurrection which, while not
in reality very dangerous, must be considered, nevertheless, as one of the factors unfavorable to us,
especially since the influence of our allies may induce us to take such measures in our relations with
Poland as will prove more dangerous to us than any open revolt.

Are we prepared for so stubborn a war as the future war of the European nations will undoubtedly
become? This question we must answer, without evasion, in the negative. That much has been done
for our defense since the Japanese war, I am the last person to deny, but even so, it is quite
inadequate considering the unprecedented scale on which a future war will inevitably be fought. The
fault lies, in a considerable measure, in our young legislative institutions, which have taken a dilettante
interest in our defenses, but are far from grasping the seriousness of the political situation arising from
the new orientation which, with the sympathy of the public, has been followed in recent years by our
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The enormous number of still unconsidered legislative bills of the war and navy departments may serve
as proof of this: for example, the plan of the organization of our national defense proposed to the Duma
as early as the days of Secretary of State Stolypin. It cannot be denied that, in the matter of military
instruction, according to the reports of specialists, we have achieved substantial improvements, as
compared with the time before the Japanese War. According to the same specialists, our field artillery
leaves nothing to be desired; the gun is entirely satisfactory, and the equipment convenient and
practical. Yet, it must be admitted that there are substantial shortcomings in the organization of our
defenses.

In this regard we must note, first of all, the insufficiency of our war supplies, which, certainly, cannot be
blamed upon the war department, since the supply schedules are still far from being executed, owing to
the low productivity of our factories. This insufficiency of munitions is the more significant since, in the
embryonic condition of our industries, we shall, during the war, have no opportunity to make up the
revealed shortage by our own efforts, and the closing of the Baltic as well as the Black Sea will prevent
the importation from abroad of the defense materials which we lack.

Another circumstance unfavorable to our defense is its far too great dependence, generally speaking,
upon foreign industry, a fact which, in connection with the above noted interruption of more or less
convenient communications with abroad, will create a series of obstacles difficult to overcome. The
quantity of our heavy artillery, the importance of which was demonstrated in the Japanese War, is far
too inadequate, and there are few machine guns. The organization of our fortress defenses has
scarcely been started, and even the fortress of Reval, which is to defend the road to the capital, is not
yet finished.

The network of strategic railways is inadequate. The railways possess a rolling stock sufficient,
perhaps, for normal traffic, but not commensurate with the colossal demands which will be made upon
them in the event of a European war. Lastly, it should not be forgotten that the impending war will be
fought among the most civilized and technically most advanced nations. Every previous war has
invariably been followed by something new in the realm of military technique, but the technical
backwardness of our industries does not create favorable conditions for our adoption of the new
inventions.

The Vital Interests of Germany and Russia Do Not Conflict

All these factors are hardly given proper thought by our diplomats, whose behavior toward Germany is,
in some respects, even aggressive, and may unduly hasten the moment of armed conflict, a moment
which, of course, is really inevitable in view of our British orientation.

The question is whether this orientation is correct, and whether even a favorable issue of the war
promises us such advantages as would compensate us for all the hardships and sacrifices which must
attend a war unparalleled in its probable strain.

The vital interests of Russia and Germany do not conflict. There are fundamental grounds for a
peaceable existence of these two States. Germany's future lies on the sea, that is, in a realm where
Russia, essentially the most continental of the great powers, has no interests whatever. We have no
overseas colonies, and shall probably never have them, and communication between the various parts
of our empire is easier overland than by water. No surplus population demanding territorial expansion is
visible, but, even from the viewpoint of new conquests, what can we gain from a victory over Germany?
Posen, or East Prussia? But why do we need these regions, densely populated as they are by Poles,
when we find it difficult enough to manage our own Russian Poles? Why encourage centripetal
tendencies, that have not ceased even to this day in the Vistula territory, by incorporating in the
Russian State the restless Posnanian and East Prussian Poles, whose national demands even the
German Government, which is more firm than the Russian, cannot stifle?

Exactly the same thing applies to Galicia. It is obviously disadvantageous to us to annex, in the
interests of national sentimentalism, a territory that has lost every vital connection with our fatherland.
For, together with a negligible handful of Galicians, Russian in spirit, how many Poles, Jews, and
Ukrainian Uniates we would receive! The so-called Ukrainian, or Mazeppist, movement is not a menace
to us at present, but we should not enable it to expand by increasing the number of turbulent Ukrainian
elements, for in this movement there undoubtedly lies the seed of an extremely dangerous Little
Russian separatism which, under favorable conditions, may assume quite unexpected proportions.
The obvious aim of our diplomacy in the rapprochement with England has been to open the Straits. But
a war with Germany seems hardly necessary for the attainment of this object, for it was England, and
not Germany at all, that closed our outlet from the Black Sea. Was it not because we made sure of the
cooperation of the later power, that we freed ourselves in 1871 from the humiliating restrictions
imposed upon us by England under the Treaty of Paris?

Also, there is reason to believe that the Germans would agree sooner than the English to let us have
the Straits, in which they have only a slight interest, and at the price of which they would gladly
purchase our alliance.

Moreover, we should not cherish any exaggerated hopes from our occupation of the Straits. Their
acquisition would be advantageous to us only as they served to close the Black Sea to others, making it
an inland sea for us, safe from enemy attack.

The Straits would not give us an outlet to the open sea, however, since on the other side of them there
lies a sea consisting almost wholly of territorial waters, a sea dotted with numerous islands where the
British navy, for instance, would have no trouble whatever in closing to us every inlet and outlet,
irrespective of the Straits. Therefore, Russia might safely welcome an arrangement which, while not
turning the Straits over to our direct control, would safeguard us against a penetration of the Black Sea
by an enemy fleet. Such an arrangement, attainable under favorable circumstances without any war,
has the additional advantage that it would not violate the interests of the Balkan States, which would
not regard our seizure of the Straits without alarm and quite natural jealousy.

In Trans-Caucasia we could, as a result of war, expand territorially only at the expense of regions
inhabited by Armenians, a move which is hardly desirable in view of the revolutionary character of
present Armenian sentiment, and of its dream of a greater Armenia; and in this region, Germany, were
we allied to her, would certainly place even fewer obstacles in our way than England. Those territorial
and economic acquisitions which might really prove useful to us are available only in places where our
ambitions may meet opposition from England, but by no means from Germany. Persia, the Pamir,
Kuldja, Kashgar, Dzungaria, Mongolia, the Ulianghai territory-all these are regions where the interests
of Russia and Germany do not conflict, whereas the interests of Russia and England have clashed
there repeatedly.

And Germany is in exactly the same situation with respect to Russia. She could seize from us, in case
of a successful war, only such territories as would be of slight value to her, and because of their
population, would prove of little use for colonization; the Vistula territory, with a Polish-Lithuanian
population, and the Baltic provinces, with a Lettish-Estonian population, are all equally turbulent and
anti-German.

Russia's Economic Advantages and Needs Do Not Conflict with Germany's

It may be argued, however, that, under modern conditions in the various nations, territorial acquisitions
are of secondary importance, while economic interests take first rank. But in this field, again, Russia's
advantages and needs do not conflict with Germany's as much as is believed. It is, of course,
undeniable that the existing Russo-German trade agreements are disadvantageous to our agriculture
and advantageous to Germany's, but it would be hardly fair to ascribe this circumstance to the
treachery and unfriendliness of Germany.

It should not be forgotten that these agreements are in many of their sections advantageous to us. The
Russian delegates who concluded these agreements were confirmed protagonists of a development of
Russian industry at any cost, and they undoubtedly made a deliberate sacrifice, at least to some extent,
of the interests of Russian agriculture to the interests of Russian industry. Furthermore, we ought not to
forget that Germany is far from being the direct consumer of the greater share of our agricultural
exports abroad. For the greater share of our agricultural produce, Germany acts merely as middleman,
and so it is for us and the consuming markets to establish direct relations and thus avoid the expensive
German mediation. Lastly, we should keep in mind that the commercial relations of States depend on
their political understandings, for no country finds advantage in the economic weakening of an ally but,
conversely, profits by the ruin of a political foe. In short, even though it be obvious that the existing
Russo-German commercial treaties are not to our advantage, and that Germany, in concluding them,
availed herself of a situation that happened to be in her favor-in other words, forced us to the wall-this
action should have been expected from Germany and thought of. It should not, however, be looked
upon as a mark of hostility toward us, but rather as an expression of healthy national self-interest,
worthy of our emulation. Aside from that, we observe, in the case of Austria-Hungary, an agricultural
country that is in a far greater economic dependence upon Germany than ours, but nevertheless, is not
prevented from attaining an agricultural development such as we may only dream of.

In view of what has been said, it would seem that the conclusion of a commercial treaty with Germany,
entirely acceptable to Russia, by no means requires that Germany first be crushed. It will be quite
sufficient to maintain neighborly relations with her, to make a careful estimate of our real interests in the
various branches of national economy, and to engage in long, insistent bargaining with German
delegates, who may be expected to protect the interests of their own fatherland and not ours.

But I would go still further and say that the ruin of Germany, from the viewpoint of our trade with her,
would be disadvantageous to us. Her defeat would unquestionably end in a peace dictated from the
viewpoint of England's economic interests. The latter will exploit to the farthest limit any success that
falls to her lot, and we will only lose, in a ruined Germany without sea routes, a market which, after all,
is valuable to us for our otherwise unmarketable products.

In respect to Germany's economic future, the interests of Russia and England are diametrically
opposed. For England, it is profitable to kill Germany's maritime trade and industry, turning her into a
poor and, if possible, agricultural country. For us, it is of advantage for Germany to develop her
sea-going commerce and the industry which serves it, so as to supply the remotest world markets, and
at the same time open her domestic market to our agricultural products, to supply her large working
population.

But; aside from the commercial treaties, it has been customary to point out the oppressive character of
German domination in Russian economic life, and the systematic penetration of German colonization
into our country, as representing a manifest peril to the Russian State. We believe, however, that fears
on these grounds are considerably exaggerated. The famous "Drang nach Osten" was in its own time
natural and understandable, since Germany's land could not accommodate her increased population,
and the surplus was driven in the direction of the least resistance, i.e., into a less densely populated
neighboring country. The German Government was compelled to recognize the inevitability of this
movement, but could hardly look upon it as to its own interests. For, after all, it was Germans who were
being lost to the influence of the German State, thus reducing the man power of their own country.
Indeed, the German Government made such strenuous efforts to preserve the connection between its
emigrants and their old fatherland that it adopted even the unusual method of tolerating dual
citizenship. It is certain, however, that a considerable proportion of German emigrants definitely and
irrevocably settled in their new homes, and slowly broke their ties with the old country. This fact,
obviously incompatible with Germany's State interests, seems to have been one of the incentives which
started her upon a colonial policy and maritime commerce, previously so alien to her. And at present,
as the German colonies increase and there is an attendant growth of German industry and naval
commerce, the German colonization movement decreases, in a measure, and the day is not remote
when the "Drang nach Osten" will become nothing more than a subject for history.

In any case, the German colonization, which undoubtedly conflicts with our State interests, must be
stopped, and here, again, friendly relations with Germany cannot harm us. To express a preference for
a German orientation does not imply the advocacy of Russian vassalage to Germany, and, while
maintaining friendly and neighborly intercourse with her, we must not sacrifice our State interests to this
object. But Germany herself will not object to measures against the continued flow of German colonists
into Russia. To her, it is of greater benefit to turn the wave of emigration toward her own colonies.
Moreover, even before Germany had colonies, when her industry was not yet sufficiently developed to
employ the entire population, the German Government did not feel justified in protesting against the
restrictive measures that were adopted against foreign colonization during the reign of Alexander III.

As regards the German domination in the field of our economic life, this phenomenon hardly justifies
the complaints usually voiced against it. Russia is far too poor, both in capital and in industrial
enterprise, to get along without a large import of foreign capital. A certain amount of dependence upon
some kind of foreign capital is, therefore, unavoidable, until such time as the industrial enterprise and
material resources of our population develop to a point where we may entirely forego the services of
foreign investors and their money. But as long as we do require them, German capital is more
advantageous to us than any other.

First and foremost, this capital is cheaper than any other, being satisfied with the lowest margin of
profit. This, to a large extent, explains the relative cheapness of German products, and their gradual
displacement of British products in the markets of the world. The lower demands of German capital, as
regards returns, have for their consequence Germany's readiness to invest in enterprises which,
because of their relatively small returns, are shunned by other foreign investor;. Also, as a result of that
relative cheapness of German capital, its influx into Russia is attended by a smaller outflow of investors'
profits from Russia, as compared with French and English investments, and so a larger amount of
rubles remain in Russia. Moreover, a considerable proportion of the profits made on German
investments in Russian industry do not leave our country at all, but are spent in Russia.

Unlike the English or French, the German capitalists, in most cases, come to stay in Russia,
themselves, with their money. It is this very German characteristic which explains in a considerable
degree the amazing number of German industrialists, manufacturers, and mill owners in our midst, as
compared with the British and French.

The latter live in their own countries, removing from Russia the profits produced by their enterprises,
down to the last kopek. The German investors, on the contrary, live in Russia for long periods, and not
infrequently settle down permanently. Whatever may be said to the contrary, the fact is that the
Germans, unlike other foreigners, soon feel at home in Russia and rapidly become Russianized. Who
has not seen Frenchmen and Englishmen, for example, who have spent almost their whole lives in
Russia and yet do not speak a word of Russian? On the other hand, are there many Germans here
who cannot make themselves understood in Russian, even though it be with a strong accent and in
broken speech? Nay, more-who has not seen genuine Russians, orthodox, loyal with all their hearts
dedicated to the principles of the Russian State, and yet only one or two generations removed from
their German emigrant ancestry? Lastly, we must not forget that Germany herself is, to a certain extent,
interested in our economic well-being. In this regard, Germany differs, to our advantage, from other
countries, which are interested exclusively in obtaining the largest possible returns from capital invested
in Russia, even at the cost of the economic ruin of this country. Germany, however, in her capacity of
permanent-although, of course, not unselfish-middleman for our foreign trade, has an interest in
preserving the productive resources of our country, as a source of profitable intermediary operations for
her.

Even a Victory over Germany Promises Russia an Exceedingly Unfavorable Prospect

In any case, even if we were to admit the necessity for eradicating German domination in the field of
our economic life, even at the price of a total banishment of German capital from Russian industry,
appropriate measures could be taken. it would seem, without war against Germany. Such a war will
demand such enormous expenditures that they will many times exceed the more than doubtful
advantages to us in the abolition of the German [economic] domination. More than that, the result of
such a war will be an economic situation compared with which the yoke of German capital will seem
easy.

For there can be no doubt that the war will necessitate expenditures which are beyond Russia's limited
financial means. We shall have to obtain credit from allied and neutral countries, but this will not be
granted gratuitously. As to what will happen if the war should end disastrously for us, I do not wish to
discuss now. The financial and economic consequences of defeat can be neither calculated nor fore-
seen, and will undoubtedly spell the total ruin of our entire national economy.

But even victory promises us extremely unfavorable financial prospects; a totally ruined Germany will
not be in a position to compensate us for the cost involved. Dictated in the interest of England, the
peace treaty will not afford Germany opportunity for sufficient economic recuperation to cover our war
expenditures, even at a distant time. The little which we may perhaps succeed in extorting from her will
have to be shared with our allies, and to our share there will fall but negligible crumbs, compared with
the war cost. Meantime, we shall have to pay our war loans, not without pressure by the allies. For,
after the destruction of German power, we shall no longer be necessary to them. Nay, more, our
political might, enhanced by our victory, will induce them to weaken us, at least economically. And so it
is inevitable that, even after a victorious conclusion of the war, we shall fall into the same sort of
financial and economic dependence upon our creditors, compared with which our present dependence
upon German capital will seem ideal.

However, no matter how sad may be the. economic prospects which face us as a result of union with
England, and, by that token, of war with Germany, they are still of secondary importance when we
think of the political consequences of this fundamentally unnatural alliance.

A Struggle Between Russia and Germany Is Profoundly Undesirable to Both Sides, as It
Amounts to a Weakening of the Monarchist Principle

It should not be forgotten that Russia and Germany are the representatives of the conservative
principle in the civilized world, as opposed to the democratic principle, incarnated in England and, to an
infinitely lesser degree, in France. Strange as it may seem, England, monarchistic and conservative to
the marrow at home, has in her foreign relations always acted as the protector of the most demagogical
tendencies, invariably encouraging all popular movements aiming at the weakening of the monarchical
principle.

From this point of view, a struggle between Germany and Russia, regardless of its issue, is profoundly
undesirable to both sides, as undoubtedly involving the weakening of the conservative principle in the
world of which the above-named two great powers are the only reliable bulwarks. More than that, one
must realize that under the exceptional conditions which exist, a general European war is mortally
dangerous both for Russia and Germany, no matter who wins. It is our firm conviction, based upon a
long and careful study of all contemporary subversive tendencies, that there must inevitably break out
in the defeated country a social revolution which, by the very nature of things, will spread to the country
of the victor.

During the many years of peaceable neighborly existence, the two countries have become united by
many ties, and a social upheaval in one is bound to affect the other. That these troubles will be of a
social, and not a political, nature cannot be doubted, and this will hold true, not only as regards Russia,
but for Germany as well. An especially favorable soil for social upheavals is found in Russia, where the
masses undoubtedly profess, unconsciously, the principles of Socialism. In spite of the spirit of
antagonism to the Government in Russian society, as unconscious as the Socialism of the broad
masses of the people, a political revolution is not possible in Russia, and any revolutionary movement
inevitably must degenerate into a Socialist movement. The opponents of the government have no
popular support. The people see no difference between a government official and an intellectual. The
Russian masses, whether workmen or peasants, are not looking for political rights, which they neither
want nor comprehend.

The peasant dreams of obtaining a gratuitous share of somebody else's land; the workman, of getting
hold of the entire capital and profits of the manufacturer. Beyond this, they have no aspirations. If these
slogans are scattered far and wide among the populace, and the Government permits agitation along
these lines, Russia will be flung into anarchy, such as she suffered in the ever-memorable period of
troubles in 1905-1906. War with Germany would create exceptionally favorable conditions for such
agitation. As already stated, this war is pregnant with enormous difficulties for us, and cannot turn out to
be a mere triumphal march to Berlin. Both military disaster,-partial ones, let us hope-and all kinds of
shortcomings in our supply are inevitable. In the excessive nervousness and spirit of opposition of our
society, these events will be given an exaggerated importance, and all the blame will be laid on the
Government.

It will be well if the Government does not yield, but declares directly that in time of war no criticism of
the governmental authority is to be tolerated, and resolutely suppresses all opposition. In the absence
of any really strong hold on the people by the opposition, this would settle the affair. The people did not
heed the writers of the Wiborg Manifesto, in its time, and they will not follow them now.

But a worse thing may happen: the government authority may make concessions, may try to come to
an agreement with the opposition, and thereby weaken itself just when the Socialist elements are ready
for action. Even though it may sound like a paradox, the fact is that agreement with the opposition in
Russia positively weakens the Government. The trouble is that our opposition refuses to reckon with
the fact that it represents no real force. The Russian opposition is intellectual throughout, and this is its
weakness, because between the intelligentsia and the people there is a profound gulf of mutual
misunderstanding and distrust. We need an artificial election law, indeed, we require the direct
influence of the governmental authority, to assure the election to the State Duma of even the most
zealous champions of popular rights. Let the Government refuse to support the elections, leaving them
to their natural course, and the legislative institutions would not see within their walls a single
intellectual, outside of a few demagogic agitators. However insistent the members of our legislative
institutions may be that the people confide in them, the peasant would rather believe the landless
government official than the Octobrist landlord in the Duma, while the workingman treats the
wage-earning factory inspector with more confidence than the legislating manufacturer, even though
the latter professes every principle of the Cadet party.

It is more than strange, under these circumstances, that the governmental authority should be asked to
reckon seriously with the opposition, that it should for this purpose renounce the role of impartial
regulator of social relationships, and come out before the broad masses of the people as the obedient
organ of the class aspirations of the intellectual and propertied minority of the population. The
opposition demands that the Government should be responsible to it, representative of a class, and
should obey the parliament which it artificially created. (Let us recall that famous expression of V.
Nabokov: "Let the executive power submit to the legislative power!" In other words, the opposition
demands that the Government should adopt the psychology of a savage, and worship the idol which he
himself made.

Russia Will be Flung into Hopeless Anarchy, the Issue of Which Will be Hard to Foresee

If the war ends in victory, the putting down of the Socialist movement will not offer any insurmountable
obstacles. There will be agrarian troubles, as a result of agitation for compensating the soldiers with
additional land allotments; there will be labor troubles during the transition from the probably increased
wages of war time to normal schedules; and this, it is to be hoped, will be all, so long as the wave of the
German social revolution has not reached us. But in the event of defeat, the possibility of which in a
struggle with a foe like Germany cannot be overlooked, social revolution in its most extreme form is
inevitable.

As has already been said, the trouble will start with the blaming of the Government for all disasters. In
the legislative institutions a bitter campaign against the Government will begin, followed by
revolutionary agitations throughout the country, with Socialist slogans, capable of arousing and rallying
the masses, beginning with the division of the land and succeeded by a division of all valuables and
property. The defeated army, having lost its most dependable men, and carried away by the tide of
primitive peasant desire for land, will find itself too demoralized to serve as a bulwark of law and order.
The legislative institutions and the intellectual opposition parties, lacking real authority in the eyes of the
people, will be powerless to stem the popular tide, aroused by themselves, and Russia will be flung into
hopeless anarchy, the issue of which cannot be foreseen.
Germany, in Case of Defeat, is Destined to Suffer Social Upheavals No Less than those
of Russia

No matter how strange it may appear at first sight, considering the extraordinary poise of the German
character, Germany, likewise, is destined to suffer, in case o defeat, no lesser social upheavals. The
effect of a disastrous war upon the population will be too severe not to bring to the surface destructive
tendencies, now deeply hidden. The peculiar social order of modern Germany rests upon the actually
predominant influence of the agrarians, Prussian Junkerdom and propertied peasants.

These elements are the bulwark of the profoundly conservative German regime headed by Prussia.
The vital interests of these classes demand a protective economic policy towards agriculture, import
duties on grain, and consequently, high price for all farm products. But Germany, with her limited
territory and increasing population, has long ago turned from an agricultural into an industrial State, so
that protection of agriculture is, in effect, a matter of taxing the larger part of the population for the
benefit of the smaller. To this majority, there is a compensation in the extensive development of the
export of German industrial products to the most distant markets, so that the advantages derived
thereby enable the industrialists and working people to pay the higher prices for the farm products
consumed at home.

Defeated, Germany will lose her world markets and maritime commerce, for the aim of the war-on the
part of its real instigator, England-will be the destruction of German competition. After this has been
achieved, the laboring masses, deprived not only of higher but of any and all wages, having suffered
greatly during the war, and being, naturally, embittered, will offer fertile soil for anti-agrarian and later
anti-social propaganda by the Socialist parties.

These parties, in turn, making use of the outraged patriotic sentiment among the people, owing to the
loss of the war, their exasperation at the militarists and the feudal burgher regime that betrayed them,
will abandon the road of peaceable evolution which they have thus far been following so steadily, and
take a purely revolutionary path. Some part will also be played, especially in the event of agrarian
troubles in neighboring Russia, by the class of landless farmhands, which is quite numerous in
Germany. Apart from this, there will be a revival of the hitherto concealed separatist tendencies in
southern Germany, and the hidden antagonism of Bavaria to domination by Prussia will emerge in all
its intensity. In short, a situation will be created which (in gravity) will be little better than that in Russia.

Peace Among the Civilized Nations is Imperiled Chiefly by the Desire of England to
Retain Her Vanishing Domination of the Seas

A summary of all that has been stated above must lead to the conclusion that a
rapprochement with England does not promise us any benefits, and that the English orientation of our
diplomacy is essentially wrong. We do not travel the same road as England; she should be left to go
her own way, and we must not quarrel on her account with Germany.

The Triple Entente is an artificial combination, without a basis of real interest. It has nothing to look
forward to. The future belongs to a close and incomparably more vital rapprochement of Russia,
Germany, France (reconciled with Germany), and Japan (allied to Russia by a strictly defensive union).
A political combination like this, lacking all aggressiveness toward other States, would safeguard for
many years the peace of the civilized nations, threatened, not by the militant intentions of Germany, as
English diplomacy is trying to show, but solely by the perfectly natural striving of England to retain at all
costs her vanishing domination of the seas. In this direction, and not in the fruitless search of a basis for
an accord with England, which is in its very nature contrary to our national plans and aims, should all
the efforts of our diplomacy be concentrated.

It goes without saying that Germany, on her part, must meet our desire to restore our well-tested
relations and friendly alliance with her, and to elaborate, in closest agreement with us, such terms of
our neighborly existence as to afford no basis for anti-German agitation on the part of our
constitutional-liberal parties, which, by their very nature, are forced to adhere, not to a Conservative
German, but to a liberal English orientation.

February, 1914
P. N. Durnovo
